.\" twm
.\" .de EX              \"Begin example
.\" .ne 5
.\" .if n .sp 1
.\" .if t .sp .5
.\" .nf
.\" .in +.5i
.\" ..
.\" .de EE
.\" .fi
.\" .in -.5i
.\" .if n .sp 1
.\" .if t .sp .5
.\" ..
.\" .ta .3i .6i .9i 1.2i 1.5i 1.8i
.TH VTWM 1 "Release 5.4.7" "X11R4-6"
.\"*********************************************************************
.\" Important note: At the time 5.4.4 was released, this manual page
.\" conformed to Sun's guidelines for manual page markup, passed
.\" checknr, had been spell checked and doubled-word checked, and was
.\" automatically translatable to HTML with man2html.  Please be careful
.\" in subsequent edits to preserve these important invariants!
.\"*********************************************************************
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
.PP
vtwm - Virtual Tab Window Manager for the X Window System
.PP
.\"=====================================================================
.SH SYNTAX
.PP
\&\fBvtwm\fP [\fB\-d\fP \fIdisplay\fP] [\fB\-f\fP [\fIinitfile\fP]]
[\fB\-m\fP [\fIoptions\fP]] [\fB\-p\fP] [\fB\-s\fP] [\fB\-v\fP]
.PP
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\&\fBvtwm\fP is a window manager for the X Window System.  It provides
titlebars, shaped windows, several forms of icon management, user-defined
macro functions, click-to-type and pointer-driven keyboard focus, and
user-specified key and pointer button bindings.
.PP
This program is usually started by the user's session manager or
startup script.  When used from \fBxdm\fP(1) or \fBxinit\fP(1) without
a session manager, \fBvtwm\fP is frequently executed in the foreground
as the last client.  When run this way, exiting \fBvtwm\fP causes the
session to be terminated (i.e., logged out).
.PP
By default, application windows are surrounded by a border with a
titlebar at the top.  The titlebar contains the window's name, a rectangular
area that indicates when the window is receiving keyboard input, and three
function boxes known as "titlebar buttons".  Pressing pointer Button1 (usually
the left-most button unless it has been changed with \fBxmodmap\fP(1)) on any
of these titlebar features will invoke the function associated with them.
.PP
With the default interface, windows are iconified by clicking (pressing and
then immediately releasing) the titlebar button that looks like a dot.
Conversely, windows are deiconified by clicking in the associated icon or
entry in the icon manager (see the descriptions of the variable
\&\fBShowIconManager\fP and the function \fBf.showiconmgr\fP in the
.B BINDINGS
section).
.PP
Windows are resized by pressing the titlebar button that resembles a group
of nested squares, dragging the pointer over the edge that is to be moved,
and releasing the pointer when the window is the desired size.
Similarly, windows are moved by pressing in the title or highlight area,
dragging it to the new location, and then releasing when the window is in
the desired position.  Just clicking in the title or highlight area
raises the window without moving it.
.PP
Pressing the titlebar button with the down arrow in it brings up a menu
with many other functions that may be applied to the window.
.PP
When new windows are created, \fBvtwm\fP will honor any size and location
information requested by the user (usually through \fB\-geometry\fP
command line argument or X11 resources for the individual applications).
With the default configuration, Clicking pointer Button1 will position the
window at the current position and give it the default size.  Pressing
pointer Button2 (usually the middle pointer button) and dragging the window
will give the window its current position but allow the sides to be resized
as described above.  Clicking pointer Button3 (usually the right pointer
button) will give the window its current position but attempt to make it
long enough to touch the bottom of the screen.
.PP
The default behavior during these operations is to represent the window with
an outline of the client window and its titlebar, lines crossing within the
client window.  Alternatively, \fBvtwm\fP may be configured to draw the
window completely, but it is not recommended unless yours is a fast system.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH THE VIRTUAL DESKTOP
\&\fBvtwm\fP is based upon the \fBtwm\fP(1) window manager, but adds extra
functionality in the form of a virtual desktop.  The virtual desktop is an
area larger than the physical screen. The real screen is considered to be a
window onto portions of the virtual desktop showing whatever windows are
present in that area of the desktop.   To help navigate around the desktop,
\&\fBvtwm\fP creates a new window, of the name \fIVTWM Desktop\fP, which shows
the entire desktop using a small scale.  In the Virtual Desktop window, all
windows that exist are displayed and various options are provided to recognize
the identity of the different windows (see the descriptions of the variables
\&\fBDesktopDisplayBackground\fP,
\&\fBDesktopDisplayForeground\fP, \fBDesktopDisplayBorder\fP and
\&\fBVirtualDesktopFont\fP).
.PP
To provide a consistent workspace, the option is provided of \fInail\fPing
windows onto the real screen.  When a window is nailed, it is considered
stuck to the real screen no matter what part of the desktop is currently
being displayed.
.PP
Normally, a few standard utilities are nailed down: the icon manager,
the desktop view, a load average chart, a clock, and a mail notifier.
The \fBf.nail\fP (or its alias, \fBf.stick\fP) function can be used to
change the nailed status of any window; see the
.B BINDINGS
section for details.
.PP
The root window of the display is unchanged by this program and utilities
such as \fBxsetroot\fP(1) will continue to work unmodified.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
\&\fBvtwm\fP accepts the following command line options:
.PP
.TP 15
.B \-d \fIdisplay\fP
This option specifies the X server to use.
.TP 15
.B \-f \fP[\fIinitfile\fP]
This option specifies the name of the startup file to use.  By default,
\&\fBvtwm\fP will look in the user's home directory for files named
\&\fI.vtwmrc.N\fP, \fI.vtwmrc\fP, \fI.twmrc.N\fP, or \fI.twmrc\fP (where
\&'\fIN\fP' is a screen number).  It also looks for system-wide default
files; see the
.B CUSTOMIZATION
section below for details. If \fIinitfile\fP is not provided, this specifies
that \fBvtwm\fP should disregard any startup files it finds, and use only the
defaults that are compiled in (intended for testing compiled-in defaults).
.TP 15
.B \-m \fP[\fIoptions\fP]
This option causes \fBvtwm\fP to preprocess the startup file using the
\&\fBm4\fP(1) macro processor. The \fIoptions\fP will be passed verbatim to
\&\fBm4\fP along with those symbols that \fBvtwm\fP declares.  Note that
\&\fIoptions\fP itself should be quoted, to prevent unwanted processing that
may occur by the shell, etc.
.TP 15
.B \-p
This option indicates that \fBvtwm\fP should attempt to write it's PID to
\&\fI$HOME/vtwm.pid\fP on startup, and delete that file on shutdown.
This file may be useful as a lock file, or for determining the correct
\&\fBvtwm\fP process for a particular user.  If the file cannot be written
on startup, a bell will sound, but \fBvtwm\fP will continue.
.TP 15
.B \-s
This option indicates that only the default screen (as specified by the
\&\fB\-d\fP option or by the \fBDISPLAY\fP environment variable) should be
managed.  By default, \fBvtwm\fP will attempt to manage all screens on the
display.
.TP 15
.B \-v
This option indicates that \fBvtwm\fP should print messages to the stderr
device when an unexpected event occurs.  This can be be useful for debugging
applications, but may be distracting in regular use.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH CUSTOMIZATION
.PP
Much of \fBvtwm\fP's appearance and behavior can be controlled by providing
a startup file in one of the following locations (searched in order for
each screen being managed when \fBvtwm\fP begins):
.TP 8
.I "$HOME/.vtwmrc.\fIscreennumber\fP"
The \fIscreennumber\fP is a small positive number (e.g., 0, 1, etc.)
representing the screen number (e.g., the last number in the DISPLAY environment
variable \fIhost:displaynum.screennum\fP) that would be used to contact that
screen of the display.  This is intended for displays with multiple screens of
differing visual types.
.TP 8
.I "$HOME/.vtwmrc"
This is the usual name for an individual user's startup file.
.TP 8
.I "$VTWMDIR/twm/system.vtwmrc"
If neither of the preceding files are found, \fBvtwm\fP will look in this
file for a default configuration.
Note that the variable is defined \fIonly in the Makefile\fP, and is often
set and tailored by the site administrator to
provide convenient menus or familiar bindings for novice users.
.TP
.I "$HOME/.twmrc.\fIscreennumber\fP"
.TP
.I "$HOME/.twmrc"
.TP
.I "$VTWMDIR/twm/system.twmrc"
When none of the
.I .vtwmrc
files can be found,
.B vtwm
reverts to acting like
.BR twm (1),
and searches for these three
.I .twmrc
variants.
Note that the variable is defined \fIonly in the Makefile\fP.
.PP
This search algorithm allows both
.BR twm (1)
and
.B vtwm
to coexist peacefully at an installation.  Since
.B vtwm
is a superset of
.BR twm (1),
it can even used to replace the latter, and users who have only a
.IR .twmrc -style
file should not notice much difference.
.PP
If no startup files are found, or if \fBvtwm\fP is told to ignore them,
\&\fBvtwm\fP will use built-in defaults as described in the
.B DESCRIPTION
section above, though the \fIsystem.vtwmrc\fP file, if re-configured before
the build, may intervene.  The only X11 resource used by \fBvtwm\fP is
\&\fIbitmapFilePath\fP for a colon-separated list of directories to search
when looking for bitmap and pixmap files (for more information, see the
\&\fIAthena Widgets\fP manual and \fBxrdb\fP(1)).
.PP
\&\fBvtwm\fP startup files are logically broken up into three types of
specifications:  \fIVariables\fP, \fIBindings\fP, \fIMenus\fP.
.PP
The \&\fIVariables\fP section must come first and is used to describe
the fonts, colors, cursors, border widths, icon and window placement,
highlighting, autoraising, layout of titles, warping, and use of the
icon manager.
.PP
The \fIBindings\fP section usually comes second and is used to specify
the functions that should be to be invoked when keyboard and pointer
buttons are pressed in windows, icons, titles, and frames.
.PP
The \fIMenus\fP section gives any user-defined menus (containing
functions to be invoked or commands to be executed).
.PP
Variable names and keywords are case-insensitive.  Strings must be surrounded
by double quote characters (e.g., \fI"blue"\fP) and are case-sensitive.
A sharp sign ('#') outside
of a string causes the remainder of the line in which the character appears to
be treated as a comment.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH M4 PREPROCESSING
.PP
A powerful feature of \fBvtwm\fP as of version 5.4.6 is that it can use
\&\fBm4\fP(1) to pre-process it's startup files.  When \fBvtwm\fP is started
with \fB\-m\fP, it will open a file for input as described above, but will
process that file through \fBm4\fP before parsing it.  So, you can use
\&\fBm4\fP macros to perform operations at runtime.  This makes it very easy
to work when you use many different displays, etc.  For example, if you want
to set the lower right section of the screen to be your \fBIconRegion\fP,
you can use \fBm4\fP directives and pre-defined symbols to calculate the
region you want:
.RS 4
.nf
define(IRegion, translit(eval(WIDTH/3)*eval(HEIGHT/2)+eval(WIDTH-WIDTH/3)-0, *, x))
IconRegion  "IRegion" SOUTH EAST 75 25
.fi
.RE
will define the lower half, and right-hand third of the screen.  The symbols
\&\fIWIDTH\fP and \fIHEIGHT\fP are calculated by \fBvtwm\fP for \fBm4\fP to
use.  The following symbols are pre-defined by \fBvtwm\fP:
.TP 15
.B "SERVERHOST"
This variable is set to the name of the machine that is running the X
server.
.TP 15
.B "CLIENTHOST"
The machine that is running the X clients (i.e., "vtwm", "xterm", etc.).
.TP 15
.B "HOSTNAME"
The canonical hostname running the clients (i.e., a fully-qualified
version of \fBCLIENTHOST\fP).
.TP 15
.B "USER"
The name of the user running the program.  Gotten from the environment.
.TP 15
.B "HOME"
The user's home directory.  Gotten from the environment.
.TP 15
.B "VERSION"
The X major protocol version.  As seen by ProtocolVersion().
.TP 15
.B "REVISION"
The X minor protocol revision.  As seen by ProtocolRevision().
.TP 15
.B "VENDOR"
The vendor of your X server (i.e., "MIT X Consortium").
.TP 15
.B "RELEASE"
The release number of your X server.  For MIT X11R5, this is "5".
.TP 15
.B "WIDTH"
The width of your display in pixels.
.TP 15
.B "HEIGHT"
The height of your display in pixels.
.TP 15
.B "X_RESOLUTION"
The X resolution of your display in pixels per meter.
.TP 15
.B "Y_RESOLUTION"
The Y resolution of your display in pixels per meter.
.TP 15
.B "PLANES"
The number of bit planes your display supports in the default root window.
.TP 15
.B "BITS_PER_RGB"
The number of significant bits in an RGB color.  (log base 2 of the number
of distinct colors that can be created.  This is often different from the
number of colors that can be displayed at once.)
.TP 15
.B "TWM_TYPE"
Tells which \fBtwm\fP derivative is running.  It will always be set to "vtwm"
in this program.  This is useful for protecting parts of your startup file
that \fBtwm\fP proper won't understand (like \fBVirtualDesktop\fP) so that it
is still usable with other \fBtwm\fP-based programs.
.TP 15
.B "CLASS"
Your visual class.  Will return one of "StaticGray", "GrayScale",
"StaticColor", "PseudoColor", "TrueColor", "DirectColor", or, if it cannot
determine what you have, "NonStandard".
.TP 15
.B "COLOR"
This will be either "Yes" or "No".  This is just a wrapper around the above
definition.  Returns "Yes" on "*Color", and "No" on "StaticGray" and "GrayScale".
.TP 15
.B "I18N"
This will be either "Yes" or "No" depending on whether support for
internationalization has been compiled in.
.TP 15
.B "XPM"
This will be either "Yes" or "No" depending on whether support for pixmap
image files has been compiled in.
.TP 15
.B "SOUND"
This will be either "Yes" or "No" depending on whether support for sound has
been compiled in.
.TP 15
.B "REGEX"
This will be either "Yes" or "No" depending on whether support for regular
expressions ("RE"s) has been compiled in.
.PP
Note that any symbols passed to \fBm4\fP on the command line that conflict
with these will not be anticipated or dealt with by \fBvtwm\fP; you will be
at the mercy of your particular \fBm4\fP.
.PP
Note also that if \fBvtwm\fP's preparation for executing \fBm4\fP fails, the
startup file will be processed normally, and will choke on the first \fBm4\fP
macro encountered.
.PP
Finally, be aware that \fBm4\fP preprocessing can cause things often found in
startup files to break.  For example, quotes and backquotes in shell commands
will be badly messed up by \fBm4\fP's own internal quoting mechanism.  This
particular problem can be worked around by placing \fIchangequote(,)\fP at
the top of your startup file.
.PP
Invoking \fBvtwm\fP with both the \fB-m\fP and \fB-v\fP options will print
the \fBm4\fP command with all symbols expanded.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH VARIABLES
.PP
Many of the aspects of \fBvtwm\fP's user interface are controlled by variables
that may be set in the user's startup file.  Some of the options are
enabled or disabled simply by the presence of a particular keyword.  Other
options require keywords, numbers, strings, or lists of all of these.
.PP
Lists are surrounded by braces and are usually separated by
whitespace or a newline.  For example:
.RS 4
.nf
\&\fBAutoRaise\fP { "emacs" "VTWM*" "x*clock" "Xmh" "XTerm" }
.fi
.RE
or
.RS 4
.nf
\&\fBAutoRaise\fP
{
    "emacs"
    "VTWM*"
    "x*clock"
    "Xmh"
    "XTerm"
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
When a variable containing a list of strings representing windows is searched
(e.g., to determine whether or not to enable autoraise as shown above), a
string must be a case-sensitive match to the window's name (given by the
WM_NAME window property), or the class name or class class (both given by the
WM_CLASS window property).  The preceding example would enable autoraise on
windows named "emacs", all \fBvtwm\fP-specific windows, any clocks installed
whose name starts with an 'x' (\fBasclock\fP will not autoraise), and all
\&\fBxmh\fP and \fBxterm\fP windows (which are of class "XTerm" and "Xmh",
respectively).  See the
.B WILDCARDS
section for details on what the asterisks ('*') mean.
.PP
String arguments that are interpreted as filenames (see the \fBPixmaps\fP,
\&\fBCursors\fP, and \fBIconDirectory\fP variables below) will
prepend the user's directory
(specified by the \fIHOME\fP environment variable) if the first character is
a tilde ('~').  If, instead, the first character is a colon (':'), the name is
assumed to refer to one of the internal bitmaps that are used to
create 2D titlebar buttons, the 2D icon manager button, and the 2D menu
pull-right icon.  Finally, if the first five characters are ":xpm:", the name
is assumed to refer to one of the built-in pixmaps that can used to create 3D
titlebar buttons, the 3D icon manager button, and the 3D menu pull-right icon.
See the
.B IMAGE AND AUDIO FORMATS
section for further details.
.PP
The following variables may be specified in the \fBvtwm\fP startup file.
Lists of window names are indicated by \fIwin-list\fP, and optional arguments
are shown in square brackets. Any default values are based on the distributed
\fIsystem.vtwmrc\fP files, and if none is mentioned, the default setting is
"off", "disabled", or "none".
.PP
.IP "\fBAppletRegion\fP \fIgeomstr\fP \fIvgrav hgrav hgrid vgrid\fP { \fIwin-list\fP }"
This variable specifies an area on the root window in which the windows
listed in \fIwin-list\fP are placed.  The \fIgeomstr\fP is a quoted string
containing a standard geometry specification for the region size and location.
If more than one \fBAppletRegion\fP is specified, windows will be put into
succeeding regions that have the window listed when the first is full.  The
\&\fIvgrav\fP argument should be either \fBNorth\fP or \fBSouth\fP and is used
to control whether windows are first filled in from the top or bottom of the
region.  Similarly, the \fIhgrav\fP argument should be either \fBEast\fP or
\&\fBWest\fP and is used to control whether windows should be filled in from
the left or right.  Windows are laid out in a grid with cells \fIhgrid\fP
pixels wide and \fIvgrid\fP pixels high.  Note that the smallest dimension of
the region must be at least the size of the largest window in it, including
frame and titlebar, in the same direction.  This variable is intended to
simplify management of all those little tool applications like \fBxcb\fP(1),
\&\fBxbiff\fP(1), \fBxload\fP(1), etc. that are used regularly.
.IP "\fBAutoPan\fP \fIN\fP" 8
This variable allows the screen to automatically pan by \fIN%\fP of a real
screen when the pointer approaches the edge of the screen. The pan will be in
the direction of the edge approached. The default is \fI100\fP, effectively
"paging" across the virtual desktop.
.IP "\fBAutoPanBorderWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
If \fBAutoPan\fP is turned on, when the pointer goes within the specified
number of \fIpixels\fP of the real screen's border, the screen is panned.
The default value is \fI5\fP.
.IP "\fBAutoPanExtraWarp\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
If \fBAutoPan\fP is turned on and \fBNaturalAutopanBehavior\fP turned off,
this variable specifies how far, in pixels, you want the pointer to move away
from the inner edge of the autopan border
when autopanning.  The default value is \fI2\fP pixels.
.IP "\fBAutoPanWarpWithRespectToRealScreen\fP \fIN\fP" 8
With this option turned on, the pointer is warped by \fIN%\fP as many pixels
on the real screen as the screen is scrolled, or by
.RS 12
.nf
(\fBAutoPanBorderWidth\fP + \fBAutoPanExtraWarp\fP)
.fi
.RE
.RS
pixels, whichever is greater.  See \fBNaturalAutopanBehavior\fP for a more thorough
discussion of this and some recommended settings.
.RE
.IP "\fBAutoRaise\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable specifies a list of windows (all windows if \fIwin-list\fP is
omitted) to be automatically raised whenever the pointer has come to rest in
a window for the amount of time specified by the \fBRaiseDelay\fP variable.
This action can be interactively enabled or disabled on individual windows
using the function \fBf.autoraise\fP.
.IP "\fBAutoRaiseDelay\fP \fImilliseconds\fP" 8
A synonym for \fBRaiseDelay\fP.
.IP "\fBAutoRelativeResize\fP" 8
This variable indicates that dragging out a window size (either when
initially sizing the window with pointer Button2 or when resizing it)
should not wait until the pointer has crossed the window edges.
Instead, moving
the pointer automatically causes the nearest edge or edges to move by the
same amount.  This allows the resizing windows that extend off
the edge of the screen.
If the pointer is
in the center of the window, or if the resize is begun by pressing a
titlebar button, \fBvtwm\fP will still wait for the pointer to cross a window
edge (to prevent accidents).  This option is
particularly useful for people who like the press-drag-release method of
sweeping out window sizes.
.IP "\fBBeNiceToColormap\fP" 8
This variable specifies that stippled lines be used for the bevel colors
when any of the 3D variables are set, to conserve on colormap allocations.
.IP "\fBBorderBevelWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
Tells \fBvtwm\fP to use 3D-looking window borders, and specifies the width in
pixels of the bevel. The color of the 3D border is \fBBorderTileBackground\fP,
and if \fBNoHighlight\fP is not selected, the border of the Focus window is
\&\fBBorderColor\fP.  The default is \fI0\fP if \fBvtwm\fP is built with
2D features, or \fI2\fP when \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBBorderColor\fP \fIstring\fP [{ \fIwincolorlist\fP }]" 8
This variable specifies the default color of the border to be placed around
all
non-iconified windows, and may only be given within a \fBColor\fP or
\&\fBMonochrome\fP list.  The optional \fIwincolorlist\fP specifies a list
of window and color name pairs for specifying particular border colors for
different types of windows.  For example:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBBorderColor\fP    "gray50"
{
    "XTerm"    "red"
    "xmh"      "green"
}
.fi
.RE
.IP
The default is \fI"gray70"\fP.
.IP "\fBBorderTileBackground\fP \fIstring\fP [{ \fIwincolorlist\fP }]" 8
This variable specifies the default background color in the gray pattern
used in unhighlighted borders (only if \fBNoHighlight\fP hasn't been set),
and may only be given within a \fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP list.  The
optional \fIwincolorlist\fP allows per-window colors to be specified.
The default is \fI"gray60"\fP.
.IP "\fBBorderTileForeground\fP \fIstring\fP [{ \fIwincolorlist\fP }]" 8
This variable specifies the default foreground color in the gray pattern
used in unhighlighted borders (only
if \fBNoHighlight\fP hasn't been set), and may only be given within a
\&\fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP list.  The optional \fIwincolorlist\fP allows
per-window colors to be specified.  The default is \fI"gray60"\fP.
.IP "\fBBorderWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
This variable specifies the width in pixels of the border surrounding
all client window frames if \fBClientBorderWidth\fP has not been specified.
This value is also used to set the border size of windows created by \fBvtwm\fP
(such as the icon manager).  The default is \fI2\fP if \fBvtwm\fP is built
with 2D features, or \fI6\fP when \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBButtonBevelWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
Tells \fBvtwm\fP to use 3D-looking window buttons. It specifies the width
in pixels of the bevel.  The default is \fI0\fP if \fBvtwm\fP is built with
2D features, or \fI1\fP when \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBButtonIndent\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
This variable specifies the size of titlebar buttons, expressed as a difference
from the titlebar font height, and normally means that titlebar buttons will
shrink (built-in images) or be cropped (external images) accordingly.
A negative value is accepted, however, indicating that titlebar buttons should
be larger than the titlebar font. Setting this to a negated \fBFramePadding\fP
value, with \fBTitleButtonBorderWidth\fP set to 0, makes titlebar buttons as
tall and wide as possible. The default is \fI0\fP if \fBvtwm\fP is built with
with 2D features, or \fI-2\fP when \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBButtonColorIsFrame\fP"
This variable specifies that the titlebar buttons will be the same color
as the window frame. It is set by default if \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D
features.
.IP "\fBClearBevelContrast\fP \fIcontrast\fP" 8
Indicates to \fBvtwm\fP how to calculate the clear bevel color for 3D items.
The value is a compressed to the range 0 and 100. The formula used is:
.RS 12
.nf
clear.{RGB} = (65535 - color.{RGB}) * (contrast / 100)
.fi
.RE
.IP
The default is \fI40\fP if \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBClientBorderWidth\fP" 8
This variable indicates that width of a window's frame should be set to
the border width as specified by the client, rather than to the value of
\&\fBBorderWidth\fP. If \fBBorderBevelWidth\fP is non-zero, however, this
variable is ignored.
.IP "\fBColor\fP { \fIcolors-list\fP }" 8
This variable specifies a list of color assignments to be made if the default
display is capable of displaying more than simple black and white.  The
\&\fIcolors-list\fP is made up of the following color variables and their values:
\&\fBDefaultBackground\fP,
\&\fBDefaultForeground\fP,
\&\fBMenuBackground\fP,
\&\fBMenuForeground\fP,
\&\fBMenuTitleBackground\fP,
\&\fBMenuTitleForeground\fP, and
\&\fBMenuShadowColor\fP.
The following
color variables may also be given a list of window and color name pairs to
allow per-window colors to be specified (see \fBBorderColor\fP for details):
\&\fBBorderColor\fP,
\&\fBDesktopDisplayForeground\fP,
\&\fBDesktopDisplayBackground\fP,
\&\fBRealScreenForeground\fP,
\&\fBRealScreenBackground\fP,
\&\fBVirtualForeground\fP,
\&\fBVirtualBackground\fP,
\&\fBDekstopDisplayBorder\fP,
\&\fBIconManagerHighlight\fP,
\&\fBBorderTitleBackground\fP,
\&\fBBorderTitleForeground\fP,
\&\fBTitleBackground\fP,
\&\fBTitleForeground\fP,
\&\fBIconBackground\fP,
\&\fBIconForeground\fP,
\&\fBIconBorderColor\fP,
\&\fBIconManagerBackground\fP, and
\&\fBIconManagerForeground\fP.
For example:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBColor\fP
{
    \fBMenuBackground\fP     "gray50"
    \fBMenuForeground\fP     "blue"
    \fBBorderColor\fP        "red"
    {
        "XTerm"        "yellow"
    }
    \fBTitleForeground\fP    "yellow"
    \fBTitleBackground\fP    "blue"
}
.fi
.RE
.IP
All of these color variables may also be specified for the \fBMonochrome\fP
variable, allowing the same initialization file to be used on both color and
monochrome displays.
.IP "\fBConstrainedMoveTime\fP \fImilliseconds\fP" 8
This variable specifies the length of time between button clicks needed to
begin a constrained move operation. Double clicking within this amount
of time when invoking \fBf.move\fP will cause the window only to be moved
in a horizontal or vertical direction.  Setting this value to 0 will disable
constrained moves.  The default is \fI400\fP milliseconds.
.IP "\fBCursors\fP { \fIcursor-list\fP }" 8
This variable specifies the glyphs that \fBvtwm\fP should use for various
pointer cursors.  Each cursor
may be defined either from the \fBcursor\fP font or from two bitmap files.
Shapes from the \fBcursor\fP font may be specified directly as:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fIcursorname\fP    "\fIstring\fP"
.fi
.RE
.RS
where \fIcursorname\fP is one of the cursor names listed below, and
\&\fIstring\fP is the name of a glyph as found in the file
/usr/include/X11/cursorfont.h (without the "XC_" prefix).
If the cursor is to be defined
from bitmap files, the following syntax is used instead:
.RE
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fIcursorname\fP    "\fIimage\fP"    "\fImask\fP"
.fi
.RE
.RS
where \fIimage\fP and \fImask\fP specify the names of files containing
the glyph image and mask in \fIbitmap\fP(1) form.
The bitmap files are located in the same manner as icon bitmap files.
The following example shows the default cursor definitions:
.RE
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBCursors\fP
{
    Frame      "top_left_arrow"
    Title      "top_left_arrow"
    Icon       "top_left_arrow"
    IconMgr    "top_left_arrow"
    Move       "fleur"
    Resize     "fleur"
    Menu       "sb_left_arrow"
    Button     "hand2"
    Wait       "watch"
    Select     "dot"
    Destroy    "pirate"
    Door       "exchange"
    Virtual    "rtl_logo"
    Desktop    "dotbox"
}
.fi
.RE
.IP "\fBDarkBevelContrast\fP \fIcontrast\fP" 8
Indicates to \fBvtwm\fP has to calculate the dark bevel color for 3D items.
The value is a comprised between 0 and 100. The formula used is:
.RS 12
.nf
dark.{RGB} = color.{RGB} * ((100 - contrast) / 100)
.fi
.RE
.IP
The default is \fI40\fP if \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBDecorateTransients\fP" 8
This variable indicates that transient windows (those containing a
WM_TRANSIENT_FOR property) should have titlebars.  By default, transients
are not reparented.
.IP "\fBDefaultBackground\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the background color to be used for sizing and
information windows.  The default is \fI"maroon"\fP for color displays or
\fI"gray50"\fP for monochrome displays.
.IP "\fBDefaultForeground\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the foreground color to be used for sizing and
information windows.  The default is \fI"gray85"\fP.
.IP "\fBDeiconifyToScreen\fP" 8
When deiconifying a window, by default, the window will be placed
at its previous geometry in the virtual desktop. With this variable
set,
.B vtwm
ensures that the window will be placed somewhere on the real
screen.
.IP "\fBDesktopDisplayBackground\fP \fIcolor\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable sets the backgrounds of the little windows inside the
Virtual Desktop window,
AND it sets the backgrounds of menu entries in the \fBVTWM Windows\fP
menu -- unless you specify \fBOldFashionedVtwmWindowsMenu\fP.
The default \fIcolor\fP is used for the default background of
windows not named in the list.  The optional
\&\fIwin-list\fP is a list of window names and colors, for example:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBDesktopDisplayBackground\fP    "purple"
{
    "zwgc"                  "green"
}
.fi
.RE
.IP
The default is \fI"gray60"\fP.
.IP "\fBDesktopDisplayBorder\fP \fIcolor\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable sets the border color in the
virtual desktop representation window to \fIcolor\fP.
The \fIwin-list\fP is in the same format as \fBTitleForeground\fP and other
similar variables.
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBDesktopDisplayBorder\fP    "black"
{
    "zwgc"              "green"
}
.fi
.RE
.IP
The default is \fI"black"\fP.
.IP "\fBDesktopDisplayForeground\fP \fIcolor\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
If both this and the \fBVirtualDesktopFont\fP variable are set,
then the names of the windows will be
written in the window representations shown in the desktop.
This entry also sets foreground colors for entries in the
\&\fBVTWM Windows\fP menu.
The format of this variable is
the same as that used for \fBDesktopDisplayBackground\fP.
The default is \fI"gray85"\fP.
.IP "\fBDontDeiconifyTransients\fP" 8
This variable sees that iconified transient windows of an iconified parent
window aren't deiconified when that parent is, thus preserving their state.
Default behavior is to deiconify all transient subwindows of the ancestor
window when it is deiconified.
.IP "\fBDontIconifyByUnmapping\fP { \fIwin-list\fP }" 8
This variable specifies a list of windows that should not be iconified by
simply unmapping the window (as would be the case if \fBIconifyByUnmapping\fP
had been set).  This is frequently used to force some windows to be treated
as icons while other windows are handled by the icon manager.
.IP "\fBDontInterpolateTitles\fP" 8
This variable specifies a modification to the \fBInterpolateMenuColors\fP
behavior.  It will cause \fBvtwm\fP to not apply color interpolation to any
titles in the middle of the menu.  So, \fBf.title\fP strings that appear in
the middle of the menu (ie, without a specific color defined for them) will
inherit the default MenuTitle foreground and background colors.
.IP "\fBDontMoveOff\fP" 8
This variable indicates that windows should not be allowed to be moved off the
screen.  It can be overridden by the \fBf.forcemove\fP function.
.IP "\fBDontShowInDisplay\fP { \fIlist\fP }" 8
This variable specifies a list of clients that should not appear in
the desktop display.  The default is:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBDontShowInDisplay\fP
{
    "VTWM *"
    "xclock"
    "xload"
}
.fi
.RE
.IP "\fBDontShowInTwmWindows\fP { \fIlist\fP }" 8
.IP "\fBDontShowInVtwmWindows\fP { \fIlist\fP }" 8
These variables specify a list of clients that should not appear in
the \fBVTWM Windows\fP menu.
.IP "\fBDontSqueezeTitle\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }] " 8
This variable indicates that titlebars should not be squeezed to their
minimum size as described under \fBSqueezeTitle\fP below.
If the optional window list is supplied, only those windows will be
prevented from being squeezed.
.IP "\fBDoorBackground\fP \fIcolor\fP [{ \fIdoor-list\fP }]" 8
Specifies background colors of doors. The default is \fI"maroon"\fP for
color displays or \fI"gray50"\fP for monochrome displays.
.IP "\fBDoorBevelWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
Tells \fBvtwm\fP to use 3D-looking doors, and specifies the width in pixels
of the bevel. The default is \fI0\fP if \fBvtwm\fP is built with 2D features,
or \fI1\fP when \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBDoorFont\fP \fIstring\fP"
This variable specifies the font to be used for text in doors.  This must
be set in order to see the doors.
The default is \fI"-adobe-helvetica-bold-r-normal--*-100-*-*-*-*-*-*"\fP.
.IP "\fBDoorForeground\fP \fIcolor\fP [{ \fIdoor-list\fP }]" 8
Specifies foreground colors of doors. The default is \fI"gray85"\fP.
.IP "\fBDoors\fP { \fIdoor-list\fP }" 8
This variable is used to create doors, which are teleports.  Each item
in the door-list has the following format:
.RS 12
.nf
"\fIwinname\fP"    "\fIlocation\fP"    "\fIjumpTo\fP"
.fi
.RE
.IP
Windows with the name \fIwinname\fP appear with geometry and position
as defined in \fIlocation\fP, and warp the user to \fIjumpTo\fP when
\&\fBf.enterdoor\fP is executed inside them.  Doors have a class of "VTWM Door".
.IP "\fBEnableXftFontRenderer\fP" 8
This variable indicates that instead of the X11 core font renderer
the Xft truetype font engine is to be used if available.
For details see the \fBNOTES\fP section below.
.IP "\fBEnhancedExecResources\fP" 8
By default, \fBf.exec\fP variables behaved as they always did in \fBvtwm\fP.  You
would have to append " &" to all of your variables in order to execute them
without blocking the window manager.  With this option turned on, you don't
have to; \fBvtwm\fP will automatically append " &" to the \fBf.exec\fP variable
.I unless
the last non-space character is either '&' or (in case you still want a
command to block the window manager) ';'. For example, in a variable such as:
.RS 12
.nf
f.exec "foo; bar; baz"
.fi
.RE
.RS
the window manager will be blocked so that "foo" and "bar" can be executed;
"baz" is the only command which will NOT block the window manager.  If you
want all these commands to be backgrounded, try the following:
.RE
.RS 12
.nf
f.exec "{ foo; bar; baz }" # note that "{" and "}"
                           # are shell keywords; they
                           # MUST be separated by
                           # spaces.
.fi
.RE
.IP
If you still want a command to block the window manager, you would use:
.RS 12
.nf
f.exec "xset fp rehash;" # vtwm will not append " &"
                         # because ';' is the last
                         # non-space character.
.fi
.RE
.IP
This behavior was inspired by that of \fBvuewm\fP(1), Hewlett-Packard's
workspace implementation of \fBmwm\fP(1).
.IP "\fBFixManagedVirtualGeometries\fP" 8
.IP "\fBFixTransientVirtualGeometries\fP" 8
These are bug workarounds that *should* fix the way most windows'
virtual geometries are handled, i.e., they should be on the real screen if
the parent windows are on the real screen, no matter where the virtual
desktop is (\fBxv\fP(1) is one example of how these \fIdon't\fP work).
They are both set by default.
.IP "\fBForceIcons\fP" 8
This variable indicates that icon image files specified in the \fBIcons\fP
variable should override any client-supplied images.
.IP "\fBFramePadding\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
This variable specifies the distance between the titlebar font or the
titlebar button height, whichever is greater, and the window frame, enlarging
the titlebar as required. See also \fBButtonIndent\fP, for how it influences
the titlebar. The default is \fI2\fP pixels.
.IP "\fBIconBackground\fP \fIstring\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable specifies the background color of icons, and may
only be specified inside of a \fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP list.
The optional \fIwin-list\fP is a list of window names and colors so that
per-window colors may be specified.  See the \fBBorderColor\fP
variable for a complete description of the \fIwin-list\fP.
The default is \fI"maroon"\fP for color displays or \fI"gray50"\fP for
monochrome displays.
.IP "\fBIconBevelWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
Tells \fBvtwm\fP to use 3D-looking icons, and specifies the width in pixels
of the bevel.  The default is \fI0\fP if \fBvtwm\fP is built with 2D features,
or \fI2\fP when \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBIconBorderColor\fP \fIstring\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable specifies the color of the border used for icon windows, and
may only be specified inside of a \fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP list.
The optional \fIwin-list\fP is a list of window names and colors so that
per-window colors may be specified.  See the \fBBorderColor\fP
variable for a complete description of the \fIwin-list\fP.
The default is \fI"gray85"\fP.
.IP "\fBIconBorderWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
This variable specifies the width in pixels of the border surrounding icon
windows.  The default is \fI2\fP if \fBvtwm\fP is built with 2D features, or
\fI0\fP when \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBIconDirectory\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the directory that should be searched if
an image file cannot be found in any of the directories
in the \fBbitmapFilePath\fP variable.
.IP "\fBIconFont\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the font to be used to display icon names within
icons.
The default is \fI"-adobe-helvetica-bold-r-normal--*-100-*-*-*-*-*-*"\fP.
.IP "\fBIconForeground\fP \fIstring\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable specifies the foreground color to be used when displaying icons,
and may only be specified inside of a
\&\fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP list.
The optional \fIwin-list\fP is a list of window names and colors so that
per-window colors may be specified.  See the \fBBorderColor\fP
variable for a complete description of the \fIwin-list\fP.
The default is \fI"gray85"\fP.
.IP "\fBIconifyByUnmapping\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable indicates that windows should be iconified by being unmapped
without trying to map any icons.  If the optional \fIwin-list\fP is provided,
only those windows will be iconified by simply unmapping.  Windows that have
both this and the \fBIconManagerDontShow\fP options set may not be accessible
unless the user has provided bindings to the warp functions (\fBf.warp\fP and
the like) while \fBWarpUnmapped\fP is set, or by the \fBVTWM Windows\fP menu.
It is set by default.
.IP "\fBIconManagerBackground\fP \fIstring\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable specifies the background color to use for icon manager entries,
and may only be specified inside of a
\&\fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP list.
The optional \fIwin-list\fP is a list of window names and colors so that
per-window colors may be specified.  See the \fBBorderColor\fP
variable for a complete description of the \fIwin-list\fP.
The default is \fI"maroon"\fP for color displays or \fI"gray50"\fP for
monochrome displays.
.IP "\fBIconManagerBevelWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
Tells \fBvtwm\fP to use 3D-looking icon manager entries, and specifies the
width in pixels of their bevels.  The default is \fI0\fP if \fBvtwm\fP is
built with 2D features, or \fI1\fP when \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBIconManagerDontShow\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable indicates that the icon manager should not display any
windows.  If the optional \fIwin-list\fP is given, only those windows will
not be displayed.  This variable is used to prevent windows that are rarely
iconified (such as \fIxclock\fP or \fIxload\fP) from taking up space in
the icon manager.  The default is:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBIconManagerDontShow\fP
{
    "VTWM *"
    "xclock"
    "xload"
}
.fi
.RE
.IP "\fBIconManagerFont\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the font to be used when displaying icon manager
entries.
The default is \fI"-adobe-helvetica-bold-r-normal--*-100-*-*-*-*-*-*"\fP.
.IP "\fBIconManagerForeground\fP \fIstring\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable specifies the foreground color to be used when displaying
icon manager entries, and may only be specified inside of a
\&\fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP list.
The optional \fIwin-list\fP is a list of window names and colors so that
per-window colors may be specified.  See the \fBBorderColor\fP
variable for a complete description of the \fIwin-list\fP.
The default is \fI"gray85"\fP.
.IP "\fBIconManagerGeometry\fP \fIstring\fP [ \fIcolumns\fP ]" 8
This variable indicates that a default icon manager is to be created, with
the geometry specified with \fIstring\fP. The \fIstring\fP argument should
be a standard X geometry specification, specifying the initial size and/or
location.  The icon manager window is then broken into \fIcolumns\fP pieces
and scaled according to the number of entries in the icon manager.  Extra
entries are wrapped to form additional rows.
The default \fIstring\fP is \fI"+0+0"\fP, and the default \fIcolumns\fP
is \fI1\fP.
.IP "\fBIconManagerHighlight\fP \fIstring\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable specifies the border color to be used when highlighting
the icon manager entry that currently has the focus,
and can only be specified inside of a
\&\fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP list.
The optional \fIwin-list\fP is a list of window names and colors so that
per-window colors may be specified.  See the \fBBorderColor\fP
variable for a complete description of the \fIwin-list\fP.
The default is \fI"black"\fP.
.IP "\fBIconManagers\fP { \fIiconmgr-list\fP }" 8
This variable specifies a list of icon managers to create, in addition to
the default icon manager if \fBIconManagerGeometry\fP is used.  Each item
in the \fIiconmgr-list\fP has the following format:
.RS 12
.nf
"\fIwinname\fP"    ["\fIiconname\fP"]    "\fIgeometry\fP"    \fIcolumns\fP
.fi
.RE
.RS
where \fIwinname\fP is the name of the windows that should be put into this
icon manager, \fIiconname\fP is the name of that icon manager window's icon,
\&\fIgeometry\fP is a standard geometry specification, and \fIcolumns\fP is
the number of columns in this icon manager as described in
\&\fBIconManagerGeometry\fP.  For example:
.RE
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBIconManagers\fP
{
    "XTerm"     "300x5+800+5"    5
    "myhost"    "400x5+100+5"    2
}
.fi
.RE
.IP
Clients whose name or class is "XTerm" will have an entry created
in the "XTerm" icon manager.  Clients whose name was "myhost" would
be put into the "myhost" icon manager.
.IP "\fBIconManagerShow\fP { \fIwin-list\fP }" 8
This variable specifies a list of windows that should appear in the icon
manager.  When used in conjunction with the \fBIconManagerDontShow\fP
variable, only the windows in this list will be shown in the icon manager.
By default, all windows are shown except those in \fBIconManagerDontShow\fP.
.IP "\fBIconRegion\fP \fIgeomstr\fP \fIvgrav hgrav hgrid vgrid\fP"
This variable specifies an area on the root window in which icons are placed
if no specific icon location is provided by the client.  The \fIgeomstr\fP
is a quoted string containing a standard geometry specification for the
region size and location.  If more than one \fBIconRegion\fP line is given,
icons will be put into the succeeding regions when the first is full.  The
\&\fIvgrav\fP argument should be either \fBNorth\fP or \fBSouth\fP and is used
to control whether icons are first filled in from the top or bottom of the
region.  Similarly, the \fIhgrav\fP argument should be either \fBEast\fP or
\&\fBWest\fP and is used to control whether icons should be filled in from the
left or right.  Icons are laid out in a grid with cells \fIhgrid\fP pixels
wide and \fIvgrid\fP pixels high.  Note that the smallest dimension of the
region must be at least the size of the largest icon in it in the same
direction.  Note also that many applications change their icon name as they
run, and no provision is made to reformat the icon regions if any icon
changes size accordingly.
.IP "\fBIcons\fP { \fIwin-list\fP }" 8
This variable specifies a list of window names and the image filenames that
should be used as their icons.  For example:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBIcons\fP
{
    "XTerm"    "xterm.icon"
    "xfd"      "xfd_icon"
}
.fi
.RE
.IP
Windows that match "XTerm" and would not be iconified by unmapping, and
would try to use
the icon image in the file "xterm.icon".  If \fBForceIcons\fP is
specified, this image will be used even if the client has requested its
own icon image.
.IP "\fBIgnoreModifiers\fP \fImodlist\fP" 8
This variable specifies the "shift states" to ignore when determining if
an event is bound by \fBvtwm\fP. In this example:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBIgnoreModifiers\fP    l | m2
.fi
.RE
.RS
the CapsLock and NumLock states will be ignored. Note that the use of
this variable can generate quite a bit of X protocol network traffic;
\&\fImodlist\fP should be kept as small as possible. See also the
.B BINDINGS
section.
.RE
.IP "\fBInfoBevelWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
Tells \fBvtwm\fP to use 3D-looking identify, move and resize windows, and
specifies the width in pixels of the bevel.  The default is \fI0\fP if
\&\fBvtwm\fP is built with 2D features, or \fI2\fP when \fBvtwm\fP is built
with 3D features.
.IP "\fBInfoFont\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the font to be used for in the identify window.
The default is \fI"-adobe-helvetica-bold-r-normal--*-100-*-*-*-*-*-*"\fP.
.IP "\fBInterpolateMenuColors\fP" 8
This variable indicates that menu entry colors should be interpolated between
entry specified colors.  In this example:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBMenu\fP    "mymenu"
{
    "Title"     ("black":"red")      f.title
    "entry1"                         f.nop
    "entry2"                         f.nop
    "entry3"    ("white":"green")    f.nop
    "entry4"                         f.nop
    "entry5"    ("red":"white")      f.nop
}
.fi
.RE
.RS
the foreground colors for "entry1" and "entry2" will be interpolated
between black and white, and the background colors between red and green.
Similarly, the foreground for "entry4" will be half-way between white and
red, and the background will be half-way between green and white.
.RE
.IP "\fBLessRandomZoomZoom\fP" 8
With this option turned on, this makes random zooms a bit less "random" and
a bit more visible.  This might make a better visual bell, depending on your
personal taste.
.IP "\fBMakeTitle\fP { \fIwin-list\fP }" 8
This variable specifies a list of windows on which a titlebar should be placed
and is used to request titles on specific windows when \fBNoTitle\fP has been
set.
.IP "\fBMaxWindowSize\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies a geometry in which the width and height
give the maximum size for a given window.  This is typically used to
restrict windows to the size of the screen.  The default is \fI"30000x30000"\fP.
.IP "\fBMenuBackground\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the background color used for menus,
and can only be specified inside of a \fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP list.
The default is \fI"maroon"\fP for color displays or \fI"gray50"\fP for
monochrome displays.
.IP "\fBMenuBevelWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
Tells \fBvtwm\fP to use 3D-looking menus, and specifies the width in
pixels of the bevel.  The default is \fI0\fP if \fBvtwm\fP is built with 2D
features, or \fI2\fP when \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBMenuFont\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the font to use when displaying menus.
The default is \fI"-adobe-helvetica-bold-r-normal--*-120-*-*-*-*-*-*"\fP.
.IP "\fBMenuForeground\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the foreground color used for menus, and can only be
specified inside of a \fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP list.  The default is
\&\fI"gray85"\fP.
.IP "\fBMenuScrollBorderWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
When the contents of a menu would make it taller than the display, moving
the pointer within \fIpixels\fP of the top or bottom of the menu causes it
to scroll the entries.  The default value is \fI2\fP.
.IP "\fBMenuScrollJump\fP \fIentries\fP" 8
This variable specifies the number of entries to scroll when the pointer
is moved within the area defined by \fBMenuScrollBorderWidth\fP.  The
default is \fI3\fP entries.
.IP "\fBMenuShadowColor\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the color of the shadow behind pull-down menus
and can only be specified inside of a
\&\fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP list.  The default is \fI"black"\fP.
.IP "\fBMenuTitleBackground\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the background color for \fBf.title\fP entries in
menus, and can only be specified inside of a \fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP
list.  The default is \fI"gray70"\fP.
.IP "\fBMenuTitleFont\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the font to be used in menu titles.
The default is \fI"-adobe-helvetica-bold-r-normal--*-120-*-*-*-*-*-*"\fP.
.IP "\fBMenuTitleForeground\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the foreground color for \fBf.title\fP entries in
menus and can only be specified inside of a \fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP
list.  The default is \fI"maroon"\fP for color displays or \fI"gray50"\fP for
monochrome displays.
.IP "\fBMonochrome\fP { \fIcolors\fP }" 8
This variable specifies a list of color assignments that should be made if
the screen has a depth of 1.  See the description of \fBColors\fP.
.IP "\fBMoveDelta\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
This variable specifies the number of pixels the pointer must move before
the \fBf.move\fP and \fBf.resize\fP functions and initial menu highlighting
starts working.  See also the \fBf.deltastop\fP function.
The default is \fI3\fP pixels.
.IP "\fBNailedAbove\fP" 8
This variable causes nailed windows to be physically above non-nailed
windows.  The \fBf.nailedabove\fP function can be used to toggle this setting.
.IP "\fBNailedDown\fP { \fIlist\fP }" 8
This variable gives a \fIlist\fP of clients that are nailed initially.
The default is:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBNailedDown\fP
{
    "VTWM *"
    "xclock"
    "xload"
}
.fi
.RE
.IP "\fBNaturalAutopanBehavior\fP" 8
By default, when autopanning, the pointer is warped by only
.RS 12
.nf
(\fBAutoPanBorderWidth\fP + \fBAutoPanExtraWarp\fP)
.fi
.RE
.RS
pixels on the real screen.  With this option turned on, the pointer is warped
on the real screen by as many pixels as the screen is scrolled, or the above
value, whichever is greater.  Thus, the pointer does not normally move very
much (only by \fBAutoPanExtraWarp\fP) in relation to the virtual desktop.
.RE
.IP
This works really well on faster X terminals and workstations, although for
slower ones, you may want to use the following:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBAutoPanWarpWithRespectToRealScreen\fP    50
.fi
.RE
.RS
to achieve a similar effect.
Setting \fBNaturalAutopanBehavior\fP has the exact same effect as using the
variable
.RE
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBAutoPanWarpWithRespectToRealScreen\fP    100
.fi
.RE
.IP "\fBNoBackingStore\fP" 8
This variable indicates that \fBvtwm\fP's windows should not request backing
store to minimize repainting.  This is typically
used with servers that can repaint faster than they can handle backing store.
.IP "\fBNoBorder\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }] " 8
This variable indicates that windows should not have borders.  If the
optional \fIwin-list\fP is given, only those windows will not have borders.
.IP "\fBNoBorderDecorations\fP" 8
This variable indicates that the 3D borders of titled windows should not have
the little divots adorning the corners.
.IP "\fBNoCaseSensitive\fP" 8
This variable indicates that case should be ignored when sorting icon names
in an icon manager.  This option is typically used with applications that
capitalize the first letter of their icon name.
.IP "\fBNoDefaultMouseOrKeyboardBindings\fP" 8
This variable indicates that \fBvtwm\fP should not supply the default pointer
and keyboard bindings.  This option should only be used if the startup file
contains a completely new set of pointer and keyboard bindings and definitions.
See also \fBNoDefaults\fP.
.IP "\fBNoDefaults\fP" 8
This variable indicates that \fBvtwm\fP should not supply the default
titlebar buttons and bindings.  This option should only be used if the startup
file contains a completely new set of bindings and definitions.  This
function has the effect of setting both \fBNoDefaultMouseOrKeyboardBindings\fP
and \fBNoDefaultTitleButtons\fP.
.IP "\fBNoDefaultTitleButtons\fP" 8
This variable indicates that \fBvtwm\fP should not supply the default
titlebar buttons.  This option should only be used if the startup file
contains a completely new set of titlebar button definitions.  See also
\&\fBNoDefaults\fP.
.IP "\fBNoGrabServer\fP" 8
This variable indicates that \fBvtwm\fP should minimize server grabs when
popping up menus and moving or resizing windows.
.IP "\fBNoHighlight\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable indicates that borders should not be highlighted to track the
location of the pointer.  If the optional \fIwin-list\fP is given, highlighting
will only be disabled for those windows.  When the border is highlighted, it
will be drawn in the current \fBBorderColor\fP.  When the border is not
highlighted, it will be stippled with an gray pattern using the
current \fBBorderTileForeground\fP and \fBBorderTileBackground\fP colors.
It is set by default if \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBNoIconManagerFocus\fP" 8
This variable indicates that \fBvtwm\fP should not set focus to windows
corresponding to their entries in an icon manager.  Normally, \fBvtwm\fP
sets the focus so that events from an icon manager are delivered to the
application.  Typically, this is set to facilitate icon manager bindings
that would otherwise be delivered to the application.
.IP "\fBNoIconManagerHighlight\fP" 8
This variable indicates that icon manager entries will not be highlighted
to track the location of the pointer. This is independant of the
\&\fBNoHighlight\fP variable.
.IP "\fBNoIconManagers\fP" 8
This variable indicates that no icon manager should be created.
.IP "\fBNoIconifyIconManagers\fP" 8
This variable indicates that no icon manager should be iconified.
.IP "\fBNoMenuShadows\fP" 8
This variable indicates that menus should not have drop shadows drawn behind
them.  This is typically used with slower servers since it speeds up menu
drawing at the expense of making the menu slightly harder to read.
.IP "\fBNoOpaqueMove\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
.IP "\fBNoOpaqueResize\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
These variables indicate that the \fBf.move\fP and \fBf.resize\fP functions
should change just a window's outline.  If the optional \fIwin-list\fP is
given, only those windows will be affected. These are usually used to narrow
the scope of "global" \fBOpaqueMove\fP and \fBOpaqueResize\fP variables.
.IP "\fBNoPrettyTitles\fP" 8
If you don't mind long titles butting up against the right edge of short
titlebars and icon managers. Disables the default behavior of using ellipses
to indicate a truncated title.
.IP "\fBNoRaiseOnDeiconify\fP" 8
.IP "\fBNoRaiseOnMove\fP" 8
.IP "\fBNoRaiseOnResize\fP" 8
.IP "\fBNoRaiseOnWarp\fP" 8
These variables indicate that windows should not be raised after a deiconify,
move, resize, or warp operation, and are typically used to preserve the window
stacking order. Note that the pointer may end up in an occluding window when
these variables are used.
.IP "\fBNoSaveUnders\fP" 8
This variable indicates that menus should not request save-unders to minimize
window repainting following menu selection.  It is typically used with displays
that can repaint faster than they can handle save-unders.
.IP "\fBNoStackMode\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable indicates that client window requests to change stacking order
should be ignored.  If the optional \fIwin-list\fP is given, only requests on
those windows will be ignored.  This is typically used to prevent applications
from relentlessly popping themselves to the front of the window stack.
.IP "\fBNoTitle\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }] " 8
This variable indicates that windows should not have titlebars.  If the
optional \fIwin-list\fP is given, only those windows will not have titlebars.
\&\fBMakeTitle\fP may be used with this option to force titlebars to be put
on specific windows.  The default is:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBNoTitle\fP
{
    "VTWM *"
    "xclock"
    "xload"
}
.fi
.RE
.IP "\fBNoTitleFocus\fP" 8
This variable indicates that \fBvtwm\fP should not set keyboard input focus to
each window as it is entered.  Normally, \fBvtwm\fP sets the focus
so that focus and key events from the titlebar and
icon managers are delivered to the application.  If the pointer is moved
quickly and \fBvtwm\fP is slow to respond, input can be directed to the old
window instead of the new.  This option is typically
used to prevent this "input lag" and to
work around bugs in older applications that have problems with focus events.
.IP "\fBNoTitleHighlight\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable indicates that the highlight area of the titlebar, which is
used to indicate the window that currently has the input focus, should not
be displayed.  If the optional \fIwin-list\fP is given, only those windows
will not have highlight areas.  This and the \fBSqueezeTitle\fP options
can be set to substantially reduce the amount of screen space required by
titlebars.
.IP "\fBNotVirtualGeometries\fP" 8
This variable indicates that \fBvtwm\fP should assume that user geometries
should be relative to the current virtual window, as opposed to absolute.
If you set this, then "xterm -geometry +20+20" specifies a position in the
current view; otherwise, it would specify a position in the top-left view.
It is set by default.
.IP "\fBNoWindowRing\fP { \fIwin-list\fP }" 8
This variable specifies a list of windows that will not be added to the
list along which the \fBf.warpring\fP function cycles.
See also \fBWindowRing\fP.
.IP "\fBOldFashionedTwmWindowsMenu\fP" 8
.IP "\fBOldFashionedVtwmWindowsMenu\fP" 8
By default, the \fBVTWM Windows\fP menu will use the same colors
that you see in the panner. This variable disables that behavior.
.IP "\fBOpaqueMove\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
.IP "\fBOpaqueResize\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
These variables indicate that the \fBf.move\fP and \fBf.resize\fP functions
should actually change the window instead of just an outline so that the user
can immediately see what the window will look like.  If the optional
\&\fIwin-list\fP is given, only those windows will be affected "opaquely".
These options are typically used on fast systems (particularly when
\&\fBNoGrabServer\fP is set).
.IP "\fBPanDistanceX\fP \fIN\fP" 8
.IP "\fBPanDistanceY\fP \fIN\fP" 8
These variables define a grid of screens for the virtual desktop, expressed
as \fIN%\fP of a real screen. When the \fBf.snap\fP function is called, the
real screen will be moved to the closest grid location. The (mis)naming of
these variables is for historical reasons. The default value is \fI100\fP,
effectively setting up "pages" in the virtual desktop.
.IP "\fBPanResistance\fP \fImilliseconds\fP" 8
This variable indicates how hard it should be to pan to an adjacent virtual
screen.  It specifies how long the pointer must be within \fBAutoPanBorderWidth\fP
pixels of the real screen's edge.  Values equal to \fI0\fP or greater than
\&\fI10000\fP disables this feature.  The default is \fI750\fP milliseconds.
.IP "\fBPauseOnExit\fP \fIN\fP" 8
.IP "\fBPauseOnQuit\fP \fIN\fP" 8
These variables define a delay on exit, expressed in seconds. They allow the
\&\fB(vtwm stop)\fP and \fBf.quit\fP sounds time to play before the connection
to \fBrplayd\fP(8) is closed.
.IP "\fBPixmaps\fP { \fIpixmaps\fP }" 8
This variable specifies a list of images that define the appearance
of various windows.  Each entry is a keyword indicating the window to set,
followed by a string giving the name of the image. Built-in and external
images may be freely mixed, given the constraints described in the 
.B IMAGE AND AUDIO FORMATS
section.
The following windows may be specified thus:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBPixmaps\fP
{
    TitleHighlight             ":xpm:sunkenbox"
    RealScreenPixmap           "scaledbackground.xpm"
    VirtualBackgroundPixmap    "gray1"
    MenuIconPixmap             ":xpm:rarrow"
    IconManagerPixmap          ":xpm:zoom"
}
.fi
.RE
.IP
By default, the \fBTitleHighlight\fP is an even, stippled pattern if \fBvtwm\fP
is built with 2D features, or "sunken" lines when \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D
features. The \fBMenuIconPixmap\fP is a right arrow by default (rendered 3D as
appropriate), and the default \fBIconManagerPixmap\fP is either the X logo or
a "raised" box, for 2D or 3D features, respectively.
.IP "\fBPointerPlacement\fP" 8
This variable indicates that windows with no specified geometry should
be placed with the window origin at the location of the mouse pointer or,
if \fBWarpSnug\fP is specified, as close as possible to that location such
that the window fits onto the real screen. If \fBRandomPlacement\fP is also
set then it takes precedence.
.IP "\fBPrettyZoom\fP" 8
If \fBZoom\fP is turned on, this makes the associated animation look just a little
nicer, depending on your personal taste.  This makes the zoom slower,
however, so you may have to decrease the value of the \fBZoom\fP variable.
.IP "\fBRaiseDelay\fP \fImilliseconds\fP" 8
For windows that are to be automatically raised when the pointer enters
(see the \fBAutoRaise\fP variable and the \fBf.autoraise\fP function)
this variable specifies the length of time the pointer should rest in
the window before it is raised.  The default is \fI0\fP milliseconds.
.IP "\fBRaiseOnStart\fP" 8
This variable specifies that the raise which would normally occur at the end
of a move or resize operation (subject to \fBMoveDelta\fP, \fBNoRaiseOnMove\fP,
and \fBNoRaiseOnResize\fP) will occur at the start of the operation. This may
be useful when \fBOpaqueMove\fP and/or \fBOpaqueResize\fP are specified. Note
that cancelling a move or resize operation with this variable set will not
preserve the window stacking order.
.IP "\fBRandomPlacement\fP" 8
This variable indicates that windows with no specified geometry should
be placed in a pseudo-random location instead of having the user drag an
outline (or the window itself if the \fBOpaqueMove\fP variable is set) to
the preferred location.
.IP "\fBRealScreenBackground\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
See \fBRealScreenForeground\fP.
.IP "\fBRealScreenBorderWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
This value specifies the border width of the \fBRealScreen\fP window
(see \fBRealScreenForeground\fP). The default value is \fI0\fP pixels.
.IP "\fBRealScreenForeground\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
Inside what \fBvtwm\fP calls the virtual desktop window, but which we might
call the "panner", is a little window that shows where the physical screen
is located in virtual space.  The \fBvtwm\fP source code calls this little
window the RealScreen.  By default, it has no border, and can be distinguished
from the normal backdrop of the panner only by its color or image.
Its foreground color has no meaning unless you give it an image.
(It can be given a border with \fBRealScreenBorderWidth\fP.)
.IP "\fBRealScreenPixmap\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
Names an image file used to decorate the RealScreen window.
A sample is provided, \fInestedsqu.xbm\fP, but your mileage may vary as the
size of your screen varies!
It is easy to find out the size of this window and to create any image file
of type \fBbitmap\fP(1) or \fBpixmap\fP(1) for it; that is the recommended
procedure.
.IP "\fBResizeFont\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the font to be used for in the dimensions window when
resizing windows.
The default is \fI"-adobe-helvetica-bold-r-normal--*-120-*-*-*-*-*-*"\fP.
.IP "\fBResizeRegion\fP \fIlocation\fP" 8
This variable specifies the area on the screen to display the resize window.
The \fIlocation\fP should be one of \fBNorthWest\fP, \fBNorthEast\fP,
\&\fBSouthWest\fP, \fBSouthEast\fP, or \fBCentered\fP.
.IP "\fBRestartPreviousState\fP" 8
This variable indicates that
\&\fBvtwm\fP should attempt to use the WM_STATE property on client windows
to tell which windows should be iconified and which should be left visible.
This is typically used to try to regenerate the state that the screen
was in before the previous window manager was shutdown. It is set by default.
.IP "\fBRightHandSidePulldownMenus\fP" 8
Pull-down menus can appear when the pointer is to the right of the center of
their parent menu, or they can appear when the pointer is closer to the right
edge of their parent menu.  This option enables the latter behavior, and is
the default.
.IP "\fBSaveColor\fP { \fIcolors-list\fP }" 8
This variable indicates a list of color assignments to be stored as pixel
values in the root window property _MIT_PRIORITY_COLORS.  Clients may elect
to preserve these values when installing their own colormap.  Note that
use of this mechanism is a way an for application to avoid the "technicolor"
problem, whereby useful screen objects such as window borders and titlebars
disappear when a programs custom colors are installed by the window
manager.
For example:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBSaveColor\fP
{
    BorderColor
    TitleBackground
    TitleForeground
    "red"
    "green"
    "blue"
}
.fi
.RE
.IP
This would place on the root window 3 pixel values for borders and titlebars,
as well as the three color strings, all taken from the default colormap.
.IP "\fBShallowReliefWindowButton\fP" 8
This indicates that the features of built-in 3D titlebar buttons, the 3D
icon manager button the 3D menu pull-right icon, and the 3D titlebar highlight
area should be rendered with a "flatter" appearance. It is set by default if
\&\fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBShowIconManager\fP" 8
This variable indicates that the icon manager window should be displayed when
\&\fBvtwm\fP is started.  It can always be brought up using the
\&\fBf.showiconmgr\fP function.
.IP "\fBSnapRealScreen\fP" 8
This variable causes the real screen to snap to a grid defined in
\&\fBPanDistanceX\fP and \fBPanDistanceY\fP increments whenever the representation
moves. The \fBf.snaprealscreen\fP function can be used to toggle this setting.
.IP "\fBSortIconManager\fP" 8
This variable indicates that entries in the icon manager should be
sorted alphabetically rather than by simply appending new windows to
the end. It is set by default.
.IP "\fBSoundHost\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies what machine (by its \fITCP/IP hostname\fP) is
running the \fBrplayd\fP(8) daemon. If not specified, the local machine
is tried. If \fBrplayd\fP(8) cannot be accessed, sound will be toggled off.
.IP "\fBSounds\fP { \fIsound-list\fP }" 8
This variable is a list of identifiers and associated sound files. It
contains entries of the form:
.RS 12
.nf
"\fIidentifier\fP"    "\fIsoundfile\fP"    [\fIvolume\fP]
.fi
.RE
.RS
where \fIidentifier\fP is any function described in the
.B BINDINGS
section except \fBf.playsound\fP, \fBf.sounds\fP, and \fBf.separator\fP,
as well as these event identifiers: \fB(vtwm start)\fP, \fB(vtwm stop)\fP,
\&\fB(client map)\fP, \fB(client unmap)\fP, \fB(menu map)\fP,
\&\fB(menu unmap)\fP, \fB(info unmap)\fP, \fB(autopan event)\fP,
and \fB(bell event)\fP. The \fIsoundfile\fP is the full pathname of
the sound file to play for the associated \fIidentifier\fP, and
\&\fIvolume\fP sets the volume for which to play that sound (see also
\&\fBSoundVolume\fP). Note that the list entries must be quoted:
.RE
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBSounds\fP
{
    "(vtwm start)"    "/usr/share/sounds/wowee.wav"
    "(vtwm stop)"     "/usr/share/sounds/seeya.wav"
    "f.exec"          "/usr/share/sounds/click.au"   50
    "(client map)"    "/usr/share/sounds/ping.au"    50
    "f.delete"        "/usr/share/sounds/doh1.wav"
    "f.deletedoor"    "/usr/share/sounds/doh2.wav"
    "f.destroy"       "/usr/share/sounds/doh3.wav"
    "(client unmap)"  "/usr/share/sounds/ping.au"
}
.fi
.RE
.IP
This example points out that some \fIidentifier\fPs "overlap":
.RS 12
.nf
f.beep > (bell event)            f.exec > (client map)
f.delete > (client unmap)        f.menu > (menu map)
f.deletedoor > (client unmap)    f.quit > (vtwm stop)
f.destroy > (client unmap)       f.version = f.identify
.fi
.RE
.IP
In these cases, the function takes precedence over the event when both
would otherwise play.
.IP "\fBSoundVolume\fP \fIN\fP" 8
This variable sets the overall volume for which to play sounds, expressed
as \fIN%\fP of maximum. Default is \fI25\fP (1/4 attenuation).
.IP "\fBSqueezeTitle\fP [{ \fIsqueeze-list\fP }] " 8
This variable indicates that \fBvtwm\fP should attempt to use the SHAPE
extension to make titlebars occupy only as much screen space as they need,
rather than extending all the way across the top of the window.
The optional \fIsqueeze-list\fP
may be used to control the location of the squeezed titlebar along the
top of the window.  It contains entries of the form:
.RS 12
.nf
"\fIname\fP"    \fIjustification\fP    \fInum\fP    \fIdenom\fP
.fi
.RE
.RS
where \fIname\fP is a window name, \fIjustification\fP is either
\&\fBleft\fP, \&\fBcenter\fP, or \fBright\fP, and \fInum\fP and
\&\fIdenom\fP are numbers specifying a ratio for the relative position
about which the titlebar is located, measured from left to right.
A ratio of 0/0 indicates that the \fIjustification\fP is absolute,
A non-zero numerator with a zero denominator indicates a pixel count,
and the \fIjustification\fP is ignored entirely for any other ratio.
For example:
.RE
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBSqueezeTitle\fP
{
    "XTerm"     left      0    0
    "xterm1"    left      1    3
    "xterm2"    right     2    3
    "oclock"    center    0    0
    "emacs"     right     0    0
}
.fi
.RE
.IP
The \fBDontSqueezeTitle\fP list can be used to turn off squeezing on
certain titles. It is set by default.
.IP "\fBStartIconified\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }] " 8
This variable indicates that client windows should initially be left as
icons until explicitly deiconified by the user.  If the optional \fIwin-list\fP
is given, only those windows will be started iconic.  This is useful for
programs that do not support an \fI-iconic\fP command line option or
resource.
.IP "\fBStaticIconPositions\fP" 8
This variable alters icon placement such that they will maintain their
positions on the virtual desktop when not nailed and \fBDeiconifyToScreen\fP
is not used.  This is most applicable when \fBSnapRealScreen\fP and
\&\fBAutoPan\fP is used with \fBPanDistanceX\fP and \fBPanDistanceY\fP values
to simulate \fBctwm\fP(1) workspaces.
.IP "\fBStayUpMenus\fP" 8
This variable alters menu interaction.  By default, a menu item is selected
when a pointer button is released over it.  This variable causes menu items to
be selected on the next button press event.
.IP "\fBStayUpOptionalMenus\fP" 8
This variable is similar to \fBStayUpMenus\fP, except that if any menu items
are selected, the menu interaction reverts to the old behavior.  For example,
suppose you have the right pointer button bound to bring up a menu with a title
bar.  Clicking the right button and releasing it (over the title bar) will
bring up the menu and have it stay up until you click on a menu item.
Clicking the right button, moving the pointer to a menu item, and releasing
the right button will activate that menu item and dismiss the menu.
.IP "\fBSticky\fP { \fIlist\fP }" 8
A synonym for \fBNailedDown\fP.
.IP "\fBStickyAbove\fP" 8
A synonym for \fBNailedAbove\fP.
.IP "\fBStrictIconManager\fP" 8
This variable causes icon managers to list only those windows that are in
an iconified state.
.IP "\fBTitleBackground\fP \fIstring\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable specifies the background color used in titlebars, and may only
be specified inside of a \fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP list.  The optional
\&\fIwin-list\fP is a list of window names and colors so that per-window
colors may be specified. The default is \fI"maroon"\fP for color displays
or \fI"gray50"\fP for monochrome displays.
.IP "\fBTitleBevelWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
Tells \fBvtwm\fP to use 3D-looking titlebars, and specifies the width in
pixels of the bevel that surrounds the titlebar. If the value of
\&\fBButtonIndent\fP added to \fBFramePadding\fP equals zero, the bevel
will be bound to the text and highlight area. The default is \fI0\fP
if \fBvtwm\fP is built with 2D features, or \fI1\fP when \fBvtwm\fP is
built with 3D features..
.IP "\fBTitleButtonBorderWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
This variable specifies the width in pixels of the border surrounding
titlebar buttons, drawn in the \fBTitleForeground\fP color. The default is
\fI1\fP if \fBvtwm\fP is built with 2D bitmaps, or \fI0\fP when \fBvtwm\fP
is built with 3D pixmaps.
.IP "\fBTitleFont\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the font to used for displaying window names in
titlebars.
The default is \fI"-adobe-helvetica-bold-r-normal--*-120-*-*-*-*-*-*"\fP.
.IP "\fBTitleForeground\fP \fIstring\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable specifies the foreground color used in titlebars, and
may only be specified inside of a \fBColor\fP or \fBMonochrome\fP list.
The optional \fIwin-list\fP is a list of window names and colors so that
per-window colors may be specified.  The default is \fI"maroon"\fP for color
displays or \fI"gray50"\fP for monochrome displays.
.IP "\fBTitlePadding\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
This variable specifies the distance between titlebar buttons in the titlebar.
Note that distances between buttons and the title, the title and the highlight
area, and the highlight area and buttons, are all set to a hard-coded value.
The default is \fI5\fP if \fBvtwm\fP is built with 2D features, or \fI0\fP
when \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBUnknownIcon\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This variable specifies the filename of an image  file to be
used as the default icon.  This image will be used as the icon of all
clients which do not provide an icon image and are not listed
in the \fBIcons\fP list.
.IP "\fBUsePPosition\fP \fIstring\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable specifies whether or not \fBvtwm\fP should honor
program-requested locations (given by the \fBPPosition\fP flag in the
WM_NORMAL_HINTS property), in the absence of a user-specified position.
The argument \fIstring\fP may have one of three values:  \fI"off"\fP
(the default) indicating that \fBvtwm\fP should ignore the program-supplied
position, \fI"on"\fP indicating that the position should be used, and
\&\fI"non-zero"\fP indicating that the position should used if it is other
than (0,0) (for working around a bug in older toolkits).
The optional \fIwin-list\fP is a list of window names and arguments that
will override the global \fIstring\fP argument. For example:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBUsePPosition\fP    "off"
{
    "MPlayer"   "on"
}
.fi
.RE
.IP "\fBVirtualBackground\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This is the background color for the panner, a.k.a. the Virtual Desktop
window.  The default is \fI"maroon"\fP for color displays or \fI"gray50"\fP
for monochrome displays.
.IP "\fBVirtualBackgroundPixmap\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
Names an image file to decorate the panner.
.IP "\fBVirtualForeground\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
Foreground for the panner; has no use unless you specify a panner
image of type \fBbitmap\fP(1).
.IP "\fBVirtualDesktop\fP \fIgeometry\fP \fIscale\fP" 8
This variable must be set to enable the virtual desktop features of
\&\fBvtwm\fP. If this variable is not set, \fBvtwm\fP will behave in
the same manner as \fBtwm\fP. This variable specifies where to place
the virtual desktop window and its size. The \fIgeometry\fP is a
standard X geometry specification and defines the size and location
of the window containing the desktop representation.
.IP
The \fIscale\fP parameter specifies the scaling of the virtual
desktop window compared to the desktop. The size specification can
be given in three ways: If size is larger than the screen size, it
represents the size of the whole desktop, and the virtual window desktop
size will then be size divided by \fIscale\fP. When size times
\&\fIscale\fP is smaller than the screen size, size represents the
number of screens that should fit in the desktop. Otherwise size
represents the size of the virtual desktop window, and the currently
accessible virtual desktop is then \fIscale\fP times the size of the
desktop window. Using the default as an example:
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBVirtualDesktop\fP    "5x2-0-0"    16
.fi
.RE
.RS
With \&\fIscale\fP set to \fI16\fP, and a physical screen size of 1024x768,
the desktop area is 1/16 the size of the screen times the number of screens
specified:
.RE
.RS 12
.nf
(5 * (1024 / 16)) x (2 * (768 / 16)) = 320 x 96
.fi
.RE
.IP
The size of the desktop can be changed dynamically, by simply resizing the
virtual desktop window.
.IP "\fBVirtualDesktopBevelWidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 8
Tells \fBvtwm\fP to use a 3D-looking virtual desktop, and specifies the width
in pixels of the bevel.  The default is \fI0\fP if \fBvtwm\fP is built with 2D
features, or \fI1\fP when \fBvtwm\fP is built with 3D features.
.IP "\fBVirtualDesktopFont\fP \fIfont\fP" 8
This variable causes \fIfont\fP to be used when displaying the names
of windows in the virtual desktop display.  If this variable is not
set, then names will not be displayed.  The \fBDesktopDisplayForeground\fP
should also be set for this feature to be useful.
The default is \fI"-adobe-helvetica-medium-r-normal--*-75-*-*-*-*-*-*"\fP.
.IP "\fBVirtualReceivesMotionEvents\fP" 8
.IP "\fBVirtualSendsMotionEvents\fP" 8
These variables indicate that changes to the position and dimension of
windows on the real screen will be reflected in the virtual desktop as
they occur, and visa-versa.
.IP "\fBWarpCentered\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
By default, on warps to windows, the pointer goes to either the center of
the titlebar, or in the absence of, the center of the top border member.
This variable specifies that the pointer should warp to the center of the
window depending on the \fIstring\fP argument: \fI"on"\fP indicates all
windows, \fI"titled"\fP indicates titled windows only, \fI"untitled"\fP
indicates untitled windows only, and \fI"off"\fP (the default) indicating
the default behavior. Note that warps to icon managers are exceptional:
The pointer always goes to either the active entry, or in the absence of,
the top entry.
.IP "\fBWarpCursor\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable indicates that the pointer should be warped into windows when
they are deiconified.  If the optional \fIwin-list\fP is given, the pointer
will only be warped when those windows are deiconified. It is set by default.
.IP "\fBWarpSnug\fP" 8
With this variable set, the warp functions (\fBf.warp\fP and the like) will
fit the entire window on the screen, i.e., they'll be snugged on the real
screen.
.IP "\fBWarpToTransients\fP" 8
This variable indicates that the pointer should be warped into transient
windows when they are created.
.IP "\fBWarpUnmapped\fP" 8
This variable indicates that the warp functions (\fBf.warp\fP and the like)
should deiconify any iconified windows they encounter.  This is typically
used to make a key binding that will pop a particular window (such as
\&\fIxmh\fP), no matter where it is.  The default is for the functions to
ignore iconified windows.
.IP "\fBWarpVisible\fP" 8
This variable indicates that the warp functions \fBf.warpclassnext\fP,
\&\fBf.warpclassprev\fP, \fBf.warpring\fP, and \fBf.warpto\fP should restrict
themselves to windows that are on the screen.  The default is for the
functions to traverse the entire virtual desktop.
.IP "\fBWarpWindows\fP" 8
When warping to a window, by default the real screen will be moved
to find the window on the virtual desktop. With this set, the window
itself will be warped to the real screen, moving the window in the virtual
desktop.
.IP "\fBWindowRing\fP [{ \fIwin-list\fP }]" 8
This variable specifies that when windows are created, they should be added
to the list that the \fBf.warpring\fP function operates on. If the optional
\&\fIwin-list\fP is given, then only those windows will be included in the
window ring. See also \fBNoWindowRing\fP and \fBf.ring\fP.
.IP "\fBXorValue\fP \fInumber\fP" 8
This variable specifies the value to use when drawing window outlines for
moving and resizing.  This should be set to a value that will result in a
variety
of distinguishable colors when exclusive-or'ed with the contents of the
user's typical screen.  Setting this variable to 1 often gives nice results
if adjacent colors in the default colormap are distinct.  By default,
\&\fBvtwm\fP will attempt to cause temporary lines to appear at the opposite
end of the colormap from the graphics.
.IP "\fBZoom\fP [ \fIcount\fP ]" 8
This variable indicates that outlines suggesting movement of a window
to and from its iconified state should be displayed whenever a window is
iconified or deiconified.  The optional \fIcount\fP argument specifies the
number of outlines to be drawn.  The default count is \fI8\fP.
.IP "\fBZoomZoom\fP" 8
This variable modifies zooms such that a random place will be used for the
source or destination when there isn't an appropriate window (e.g., an icon,
icon manager entry, or client window).  Default behavior inhibits zooms when
there aren't appropriate windows, except for the \fBf.zoomzoom\fP function.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH SPECIAL VARIABLES
.PP
The following variables must be set after the fonts have been
assigned, so it is usually best to put them at the end of the variables
or beginning of the bindings sections:
.IP "\fBDefaultFunction\fP \fIfunction\fP" 8
This variable specifies the function to be executed when a key or button
event is received for which no binding is provided.  This is typically
bound to \fBf.nop\fP, \fBf.beep\fP, or a menu containing window operations.
.IP "\fBWindowFunction\fP \fIfunction\fP" 8
This variable specifies the function to execute when a window is selected
from the \fBVTWM Windows\fP menu.  If this variable is not set (default),
the window will be deiconified and raised.  It is strongly recommended that
if this is set, the function includes provision for deiconifying windows.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH BINDINGS
.PP
After the desired variables have been set, functions may be attached
titlebar buttons and key and pointer buttons.  Titlebar buttons may be added
from the left or right side and appear in the titlebar from left-to-right
according to the
order in which they are specified.  Key and pointer button
bindings may be given in any order.
.PP
Titlebuttons specifications must include the name of the image to use in
the button box and the function to be invoked when a pointer button is
pressed within them:
.RS 4
.nf
\&\fBLeftTitleButton\fP  "\fIimage\fP" = \fIfunction\fP
.fi
.RE
or
.RS 4
.nf
\&\fBRightTitleButton\fP "\fIimage\fP" = \fIfunction\fP
.fi
.RE
.PP
See the \fBButtonIndent\fP and \fBFramePadding\fP variables and the
.B IMAGE AND AUDIO FORMATS
section for details on the \fIimage\fP specification.
.PP
Key and pointer button specifications must give the modifiers that must
be pressed, over which parts of the screen the pointer must be, and what
function is to be invoked.  Keys are given as strings containing the
appropriate
keysym name; buttons are given as the keywords \fBButton1\fP-\fBButton5\fP:
.RS 4
.nf
"FP1"   = \fImodlist\fP : \fIcontext\fP : \fIfunction\fP
\&\fBButton1\fP = \fImodlist\fP : \fIcontext\fP : \fIfunction\fP
.fi
.RE
.PP
The \fImodlist\fP is any combination of the modifier names \fBshift\fP,
\&\fBcontrol\fP, \fBlock\fP, \fBmeta\fP, \fBmod1\fP, \fBmod2\fP, \fBmod3\fP,
\&\fBmod4\fP, or \fBmod5\fP (which may be abbreviated as
\&\fBs\fP, \fBc\fP, \fBl\fP, \fBm\fP, \fBm1\fP, \fBm2\fP, \fBm3\fP, \fBm4\fP,
\&\fBm5\fP, respectively) separated by a vertical bar (\(or).
Similarly, the \fIcontext\fP is any combination of
\&\fBwindow\fP,
\&\fBtitle\fP,
\&\fBicon\fP,
\&\fBroot\fP,
\&\fBframe\fP,
\&\fBvirtual\fP,
\&\fBdesktop\fP,
\&\fBdoor\fP,
\&\fBiconmgr\fP, their first letters (\fBiconmgr\fP abbreviation is
\&\fBm\fP, \fBdoor\fP has no abbreviation),
or \fBall\fP, separated by a vertical bar.  It is rumored that window class
names will also work.  The \fIfunction\fP is any of the \fBf.\fP keywords
described below.  For example, the default startup file contains the following
bindings:
.RS 4
.nf
Button1 =   : root          : f.menu "VTWM Windows"
Button1 = m : window | icon : f.function "move-or-lower"
Button2 = m : window | icon : f.iconify
Button3 = m : window | icon : f.move
Button1 =   : title         : f.move
Button2 =   : title         : f.raiselower
Button1 =   : icon          : f.function "move-or-iconify"
Button2 =   : icon          : f.iconify
Button1 =   : iconmgr       : f.iconify
Button2 =   : iconmgr       : f.iconify
.fi
.RE
.PP
A user who wanted to be able to manipulate windows from the keyboard could
use the following bindings:
.RS 4
.nf
"F1"    =       : all : f.iconify
"F2"    =       : all : f.raiselower
"F3"    =       : all : f.warpring "next"
"F4"    =       : all : f.warpto "xmh"
"F5"    =       : all : f.warpto "emacs"
"F6"    =       : all : f.colormap "next"
"F7"    =       : all : f.colormap "default"
"F20"   =       : all : f.warptoscreen "next"
"Left"  = m     : all : f.backiconmgr
"Right" = m | s : all : f.forwiconmgr
"Up"    = m     : all : f.upiconmgr
"Down"  = m | s : all : f.downiconmgr
.fi
.RE
.PP
Note, however, that using \fIall\fP for button or key bindings is
almost always a bad idea, since it prevents all applications from
receiving those events; this can cripple text and graphics editors
that otherwise expect to see those buttons or keys (see also the
\&\fBIgnoreModifiers\fP variable, and the \fBf.bindbuttons\fP,
\&\fBf.bindkeys\fP, \fBf.unbindbuttons\fP, and \fBf.unbindkeys\fP
functions).
.PP
\&\fBvtwm\fP provides many more window manipulation primitives than can be
conveniently stored in a titlebar, menu, or set of key bindings.  Although
a small set of defaults are supplied (unless either \fBNoDefaults\fP,
\&\fBNoDefaultMouseOrKeyboardBindings\fP, or \fBNoDefaultTitleButtons\fP is
specified), most users will want to have their most common operations
bound to key and button strokes.  To do this, \fBvtwm\fP associates names
with each of the primitives and provides \fIuser-defined functions\fP for
building higher level primitives and \fImenus\fP for interactively selecting
among groups of functions.
.PP
User-defined functions contain the name by which they are referenced in
calls to \fBf.function\fP and a list of other functions to execute.  For
example:
.RS 4
.nf
Function "move-or-lower"    { f.move f.deltastop f.lower }
Function "move-or-iconify"  { f.move f.deltastop f.iconify }
Function "restore-colormap" { f.colormap "default" f.lower }
.fi
.RE
.PP
The function name must be used in \fBf.function\fP exactly as it appears in
the function specification.
.PP
\&\fBVTWM PROFILE\fP.  If a function called "VTWM Profile"
is defined within the startup file, that function will be executed
upon startup or restarting of the window manager.  For example:
.RS 4
.nf
AutoPan    25
Function   "VTWM Profile"
{
    f.autopan
}
.fi
.RE
gives \fBAutoPan\fP a value but turns autopanning off initially (it won't
have a value unless \fBAutoPan\fP is set in the startup file; see
\&\fBf.autopan\fP below), in case you want to turn it on sometime later.
.PP
In the descriptions below, if the function is said to operate on the selected
window, but is invoked from a root menu, the cursor will be changed to
the \fBSelect\fP cursor and the next window to receive a button press will
be chosen:
.IP "\fB!\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This is an abbreviation for \fBf.exec\fP \fIstring\fP.
.IP "\fB^\fP \fIstring\fP (OBSOLETE --- use a clipboard client)" 8
This is an abbreviation for \fBf.cut\fP \fIstring\fP.
.IP "\fBf.autopan\fP" 8
If autopan wasn't configured in your .vtwmrc file, this does
nothing. If, however, it was configured, this toggles the current
autopan state. The reason for this command is that autopan is
sometimes nice to have, but it interferes with using sticky windows
that are near the edge of the screen. With this command, you get the
best of both worlds.
.IP "\fBf.autoraise\fP" 8
This function toggles whether or not the selected window is raised whenever
entered by the pointer.  See the description of the variable \fBAutoRaise\fP.
.IP "\fBf.backiconmgr\fP" 8
This function warps the pointer to the previous column in the
current icon manager, wrapping back to the previous row if necessary.
.IP "\fBf.beep\fP" 8
This function sounds the keyboard bell.
.IP "\fBf.bindbuttons\fP" 8
.IP "\fBf.bindkeys\fP" 8
These functions enable \fBvtwm\fP's pointer or keyboard bindings for the
selected window.  These are only needed if the bindings have been disabled
with the \fBf.unbindbuttons\fP or \fBf.unbindkeys\fP functions.  Be careful
what you bind these functions to; \fBf.bindkeys\fP bound to a window context
key will not be accessable after \fBf.unbindkeys\fP is invoked for the window!
.IP "\fBf.bottomzoom\fP" 8
This function is similar to the \fBf.fullzoom\fP function, but
resizes the window to fill only the bottom half of the screen.
.IP "\fBf.circledown\fP" 8
This function lowers the top-most window that occludes another window.
.IP "\fBf.circleup\fP" 8
This function raises the bottom-most window that is occluded by another window.
.IP "\fBf.colormap\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This function rotates the colormaps (obtained from the WM_COLORMAP_WINDOWS
property on the window) that \fBvtwm\fP will display when the pointer
is in this window.  The argument \fIstring\fP may have one of the following
values: \fI"next"\fP, \fI"prev"\fP, and \fI"default"\fP.  It should be noted
here that in general, the installed colormap is determined by keyboard focus.
A pointer driven keyboard focus will install a private colormap upon entry
of the window owning the colormap.  Using the click to type model, private
colormaps will not be installed until the user presses a pointer button on
the target window.
.IP "\fBf.cut\fP \fIstring\fP (OBSOLETE --- use a clipboard client)" 8
This function places the specified \fIstring\fP (followed by a newline
character) into the root window property CUT_BUFFER0.
.IP "\fBf.cutfile\fP (OBSOLETE --- use a clipboard client)" 8
This function reads the file indicated by the contents of the CUT_BUFFER0
window property and replaces the cut buffer.
.IP "\fBf.deiconify\fP" 8
This function deiconifies the selected window.  If the window is not an icon,
this function does nothing.
.IP "\fBf.delete\fP" 8
This function sends the WM_DELETE_WINDOW message to the selected window if
the client application has requested it through the WM_PROTOCOLS window
property.  The application is supposed to respond to the message by removing
the window.  If the window has not requested
WM_DELETE_WINDOW messages, the keyboard bell will be rung indicating that
the user should choose an alternative method.  Note this is very different
from \fBf.destroy\fP.  The intent here is to delete a single window,  not
necessarily the entire application.
.IP "\fBf.deletedoor\fP" 8
This function deletes a door.
.IP "\fBf.deltastop\fP" 8
This function allows a user-defined function to be aborted if the pointer has
been moved more than \fPMoveDelta\fP pixels.  See the example definition
given for \fBFunction "move-or-lower"\fP at the beginning of the section.
.IP "\fBf.destroy\fP" 8
This function instructs the X server to close the display connection of the
client that created the selected window.  This should only be used as a last
resort for shutting down runaway clients.  See also \fBf.delete\fP.
.IP
This action sometimes leaves a runaway process that consumes CPU
cycles; you should always try to use the applications own quit
function, rather than this one.
.IP "\fBf.downiconmgr\fP" 8
This function warps the pointer to the next row in the current icon manger,
wrapping to the beginning of the next column if necessary.
.IP "\fBf.enterdoor\fP" 8
This function activates this door.  Typically one binds:
.RS 12
.nf
Button1 = : door : f.enterdoor
Button2 = : door : f.enterdoor
Button3 = : door : f.enterdoor
.fi
.RE
.IP "\fBf.exec\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This function passes the argument \fIstring\fP to /bin/sh for execution.
In multiscreen mode, if \fIstring\fP starts a new X client without
giving a display argument, the client will appear on the screen from
which this function was invoked.
.IP "\fBf.file\fP \fIstring\fP (OBSOLETE --- use a clipboard client)" 8
This function assumes \fIstring\fP is a file name.  This file is read into
the window server's cut buffer.
.IP "\fBf.focus\fP" 8
This function toggles the keyboard focus of the server to the
selected window, changing the focus rule from pointer-driven if necessary.
If the selected window already was focused, this function executes an
\&\fBf.unfocus\fP.
.IP "\fBf.forcemove\fP" 8
This function is like \fBf.move\fP except that it ignores the \fBDontMoveOff\fP
variable.
.IP "\fBf.forwiconmgr\fP" 8
This function warps the pointer to the next column in the current icon
manager, wrapping to the beginning of the next row if necessary.
.IP "\fBf.fullzoom\fP" 8
This function resizes the selected window to the full size of the display or
else restores the original size if the window was already zoomed.
.IP "\fBf.function\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This function executes the user-defined function whose name is specified
by the argument \fIstring\fP.
.IP "\fBf.hbzoom\fP" 8
This function is a synonym for \fBf.bottomzoom\fP.
.IP "\fBf.hidedesktopdisplay\fP" 8
This function unmaps the desktop display.
.IP "\fBf.hideiconmgr\fP" 8
This function unmaps the current icon manager when selected from a client
window, and unmaps all icon managers when selected from the root window.
.IP "\fBf.horizoom\fP" 8
This variable is similar to the \fBf.zoom\fP function except that the
selected window is resized to the full width of the display.
.IP "\fBf.htzoom\fP" 8
This function is a synonym for \fBf.topzoom\fP.
.IP "\fBf.hzoom\fP" 8
This function is a synonym for \fBf.horizoom\fP.
.IP "\fBf.iconify\fP" 8
This function iconifies or deiconifies the selected window or icon,
respectively.
.IP "\fBf.identify\fP" 8
This function displays a summary of the name and geometry of the
selected window.  Clicking the pointer or pressing a key in the window
will dismiss it.  If the function is invoked on a desktop representation of
a window, the real window which is represented will be identified.
.IP "\fBf.lefticonmgr\fP" 8
This function similar to \fBf.backiconmgr\fP except that wrapping does not
change rows.
.IP "\fBf.leftzoom\fP" 8
This variable is similar to the \fBf.bottomzoom\fP function but causes
the selected window is only resized to the left half of the display.
.IP "\fBf.lower\fP" 8
This function lowers the selected window.
.IP "\fBf.menu\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This function invokes the menu specified by the argument \fIstring\fP.
Cascaded menus may be built by nesting calls to \fBf.menu\fP.
.IP "\fBf.move\fP" 8
This function drags an outline of the selected window (or the window itself
if the \fBOpaqueMove\fP variable is set) until the invoking pointer button
is released, at which time the window is raised (subject to
\&\fBRaiseOnStart\fP, \fBMoveDelta\fP, and \fBNoRaiseOnMove\fP). Double
clicking within the number of milliseconds given by \fBConstrainedMoveTime\fP
warps the pointer to the center of the window and constrains the move
horizontally or vertically, depending on pointer movement. To abort the move,
press another button before releasing the invoking button.
.IP "\fBf.movescreen\fP" 8
Moves a window (or possibly the real screen) inside the desktop display. To
abort the move, press another button before releasing the invoking button.
By default, the bindings using the \fBdesktop\fP context are defined as:
.RS 12
.nf
Button1 = : desktop : f.movescreen
Button2 = : desktop : f.movescreen
.fi
.RE
.IP
This is useful if you want to reset the default keyboard and pointer bindings
via \fBNoDefaultMouseOrKeyboardBindings\fP and use some of your own for the
virtual desktop, e.g.:
.RS 12
.nf
NoDefaultMouseOrKeyboardBindings
Button1 = : desktop : f.movescreen
Button2 = : desktop : f.warp
Button3 = : desktop : f.iconify
.fi
.RE
.IP
This function is not useful under any context other than "desktop".
.IP "\fBf.nail\fP" 8
This function nails or unnails the selected window onto the real screen; the
current value of this property is toggled on the window.
.IP "\fBf.nailedabove\fP" 8
This function toggles the setting of the \fBNailedAbove\fP variable.
.IP "\fBf.namedoor\fP" 8
This function, bound to the door context, pastes a name from CUT_BUFFER0
into the selected door (see the
.B BINDINGS
section for details).
.IP "\fBf.newdoor\fP" 8
This function creates a new door with it's destination and name set to the real
screen's current position in the virtual desktop.
.IP "\fBf.nexticonmgr\fP" 8
This function warps the pointer to the next icon manager containing any windows
on the current or any succeeding screen.
.IP "\fBf.nop\fP" 8
This function does nothing and is typically used with the \fBDefaultFunction\fP
or \fBWindowFunction\fP variables or to introduce blank lines in menus.
.IP "\fBf.panup\fP \fIN\fP" 8
.IP "\fBf.pandown\fP \fIN\fP" 8
.IP "\fBf.panleft\fP \fIN\fP" 8
.IP "\fBf.panright\fP \fIN\fP" 8
These functions move the real screen by \fIN%\fP of the screen dimension in the
indicated direction.  These are ideally bound to the cursor keys:
.RS 12
.nf
"Up"    = : root : f.panup    "100"
"Down"  = : root : f.pandown  "100"
"Left"  = : root : f.panleft  "100"
"Right" = : root : f.panright "100"
.fi
.RE
.IP "\fBf.playsound\fP \fIsoundfile\fP" 8
This function plays the specified sound at \fBSoundVolume\fP volume. The
\&\fIsoundfile\fP must be the full pathname of the sound file. This is a
rather "expensive" function compared to that provided by the \fBSounds\fP
variable, and should be avoided.
.IP "\fBf.previconmgr\fP" 8
This function warps the pointer to the previous icon manager containing any
windows on the current or preceding screens.
.IP "\fBf.quit\fP" 8
This function causes \fBvtwm\fP to restore the window's borders and exit.  If
\&\fBvtwm\fP is the last client invoked from \fIxdm\fP, this will result in a
server reset, and the user's session will be logged out.
.IP
Users who stay logged in for long periods (days or weeks), or who like
to change window managers, or experiment with them, may find it
desirable to use a relatively simple application, such as
.BR xbiff (1),
as the last application in their
.IR .xinitrc
or
.IR .xsession
file, letting the window manager start earlier, and run in the
background.  This allows changing window managers without logging out,
and also makes it much less likely that a session will be abruptly
terminated by a bug in a complex program like a window manager.  The
one drawback to this approach is that \fBf.quit\fP then no longer
terminates the session: you need to use \fBf.delete\fP or \fBf.destroy\fP
on that last application to logout.
.IP "\fBf.raise\fP" 8
This function raises the selected window.
.IP "\fBf.raiselower\fP" 8
This function raises the selected window to the top of the stacking order if
it is occluded by any windows, otherwise the window will be lowered.
.IP "\fBf.refresh\fP" 8
This function causes all windows to be refreshed.
.IP "\fBf.resetdesktop\fP" 8
This function moves the real display to (0,0)
.IP "\fBf.resize\fP" 8
This function drags an outline of the selected window (or the window itself
if the \fBOpaqueResize\fP variable is set) after crossing a border (or by
setting \fBAutoRelativeResize\fP) until the invoking pointer button is
released, at which time the window is raised (subject to
\&\fBRaiseOnStart\fP, \fBMoveDelta\fP, and \fBNoRaiseOnResize\fP). To abort
the resize, press another button before releasing the invoking button.
.IP "\fBf.restart\fP" 8
This function kills and restarts \fBvtwm\fP. See also \fBf.startwm\fP.
.IP "\fBf.righticonmgr\fP" 8
This function is similar to \fBf.nexticonmgr\fP except that wrapping does
not change rows.
.IP "\fBf.rightzoom\fP" 8
This variable is similar to the \fBf.bottomzoom\fP function except that
the selected window is only resized to the right half of the display.
.IP "\fBf.ring\fP" 8
Selects a window and adds it to the \fBWindowRing\fP list, or removes it if
it was already in the ring. This command makes \fBf.warpring\fP much more
useful, by making its configuration dynamic.
.IP "\fBf.saveyourself\fP" 8
This function sends a WM_SAVEYOURSELF message to the selected window if it
has requested the message in its WM_PROTOCOLS window property.  Clients that
accept this message are supposed to checkpoint all state associated with the
window and update the WM_COMMAND property as specified in the ICCCM.  If
the window has not requested this message, the keyboard bell will be rung.
.IP "\fBf.separator\fP" 8
Valid only in menus. The effect is to add a line separator between the
previous and the following entry. The name selector part in the menu is not
used (but must be present).
.IP "\fBf.setrealscreen\fP \fIgeomstr\fP" 8
This function sets the real screen to the virtual coordinates specified.
The \fIgeomstr\fP is a quoted string containing a standard geometry
specification.
.IP "\fBf.showdesktopdisplay\fP" 8
This function maps the desktop display.
.IP "\fBf.showiconmgr\fP" 8
This function maps the current icon manager when selected from a client
window, and maps all icon managers when selected from the root window.
.IP "\fBf.snap\fP" 8
This function snaps the real screen to a grid defined on virtual space with
\&\fBPanDistanceX\fP and \fBPanDistanceY\fP increments.
.IP "\fBf.snaprealscreen\fP" 8
This function toggles the setting of \fBSnapRealScreen\fP.
.IP "\fBf.snugdesktop\fP" 8
moves the display to try to fit all partially visible windows
completely on the screen.
.IP "\fBf.snugwindow\fP" 8
moves the display to try to fit the selected window completely
on the screen
.IP "\fBf.sorticonmgr\fP" 8
This function sorts the entries in the current icon manager alphabetically.
See the variable \fBSortIconManager\fP.
.IP "\fBf.sounds\fP" 8
This function toggles the playing of sounds. It's a "mute" function.
.\".IP "\fBf.source\fP \fIstring\fP (DOES NOT WORK!!!)" 8
.\"This function assumes \fIstring\fP is a file name.  The file is read
.\"and parsed as a \fBvtwm\fP startup file.
.\"This function is intended to be used only to re-build pull-down menus.  None
.\"of the \fBvtwm\fP variables are changed.
.IP "\fBf.squeezecenter\fP" 8
.IP "\fBf.squeezeleft\fP" 8
.IP "\fBf.squeezeright\fP" 8
Selects a window and makes its title appear as though you had
configured it as
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBSqueezeTitle\fP    center    0    0
.fi
.RE
.RS
or
.RE
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBSqueezeTitle\fP    left      0    0
.fi
.RE
.RS
or
.RE
.RS 12
.nf
\&\fBSqueezeTitle\fP    right     0    0
.fi
.RE
.RS
respectively. These make squeezed titles much more useful because their
configuration is dynamic.
.RE
.IP "\fBf.startwm\fP \fIcommandline\fP" 8
This function kills \fBvtwm\fP, and starts up the window manager as specified
by \fIcommandline\fP. A trailing ampersand and/or environment variables should
not be used. See also \fBf.restart\fP.
.IP "\fBf.staticiconpositions\fP" 8
This function toggles the setting of \fBStaticIconPositions\fP.
.IP "\fBf.stick\fP" 8
This function is a synonym for \fBf.nail\fP.
.IP "\fBf.stickyabove\fP" 8
This function is synonymous with the \fBf.nailedabove\fP function.
.IP "\fBf.stricticonmgr\fP" 8
This function toggles the setting of \fBStrictIconManager\fP.
.IP "\fBf.title\fP" 8
This function provides a centered, unselectable item in a menu definition.  It
should not be used in any other context.
.IP "\fBf.topzoom\fP" 8
This variable is similar to the \fBf.bottomzoom\fP function except that
the selected window is only resized to the top half of the display.
.IP "\fBf.twmrc\fP" 8
Synonymous with \fBf.restart\fP.  Historically, this function was intended
to cause the startup customization file to be re-read.
.IP "\fBf.unbindbuttons\fP" 8
.IP "\fBf.unbindkeys\fP" 8
These functions disable \fBvtwm\fP's pointer or keyboard bindings for the
selected window, allowing events to pass directly to the application.  These
are useful, for example, when running another window manager within \fBXnest\fP
or \fBXvnc\fP.
.IP "\fBf.unfocus\fP" 8
This function resets the focus back to pointer-driven.  This should be used
when a focused window is no longer desired.
.IP "\fBf.upiconmgr\fP" 8
This function warps the pointer to the previous row in the current icon
manager, wrapping to the last row in the same column if necessary.
.IP "\fBf.version\fP" 8
This function causes the \fBvtwm\fP version window to be displayed.  This
window will be displayed until a pointer button is pressed or the
pointer is moved from one window to another.
.IP "\fBf.virtualgeometries\fP" 8
This function toggles the setting of \fBNotVirtualGeometries\fP.
.IP "\fBf.vlzoom\fP" 8
This function is a synonym for \fBf.leftzoom\fP.
.IP "\fBf.vrzoom\fP" 8
This function is a synonym for \fBf.rightzoom\fP.
.IP "\fBf.warp\fP" 8
Warp the cursor to the selected window.  This is only useful if the window
is selected via the icon manager.
.IP "\fBf.warpclassnext\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
.IP "\fBf.warpclassprev\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
These functions warp the pointer to the next or previous window in the
specified class indicated by the argument \fIstring\fP.  If \fIstring\fP is
\&\fI"VTWM"\fP, only icon managers, doors, and the Virtual Desktop window are
considered.  If \fIstring\fP empty (i.e., \fI""\fP), the class of the window
with focus is used.  If the window is iconified, it will be deiconified if
the variable \fBWarpUnmapped\fP is set or else ignored.
.IP "\fBf.warpring\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This function warps the pointer to the next or previous window (as indicated
by the argument \fIstring\fP, which may be \fI"next"\fP or \fI"prev"\fP)
specified in the \fBWindowRing\fP variable.  If the window is iconified, it
will be deiconified if the variable \fBWarpUnmapped\fP is set or else ignored.
.IP "\fBf.warpsnug\fP" 8
This function toggles the setting of \fBWarpSnug\fP.
.IP "\fBf.warpto\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This function warps the pointer to the window which has a name or class
that matches \fIstring\fP. The \fIstring\fP may be a VTWM-style wildcard, but
not a \fIregular expression\fP (see the
.B WILDCARDS
section for details).
If the window is iconified, it will be deiconified if the \fBWarpUnmapped\fP
variable is set, or else ignored.
.IP "\fBf.warptoiconmgr\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This function warps the pointer to the icon manager entry associated with
the window containing the pointer in the icon manager specified by the
argument \fIstring\fP.  If \fIstring\fP is empty (i.e., \fI""\fP), the
current icon manager is chosen.  If the window is iconified, it will be
deiconified if the variable \fBWarpUnmapped\fP is set or else ignored.
.IP "\fBf.warptonewest\fP" 8
This function warps the pointer to the most recently created window.
If the window is iconified, it will be deiconified if the variable
\&\fBWarpUnmapped\fP is set or else ignored.
.IP "\fBf.warptoscreen\fP \fIstring\fP" 8
This function warps the pointer to the screen specified by the
argument \fIstring\fP.  \fIString\fP may be a number (e.g., \fI"0"\fP or
\&\fI"1"\fP), the word \fI"next"\fP (indicating the current screen plus 1,
skipping over any unmanaged screens),
the word \fI"back"\fP (indicating the current screen minus 1, skipping over
any unmanaged screens), or the word
\&\fI"prev"\fP (indicating the last screen visited.
.IP "\fBf.warpvisible\fP" 8
This function toggles the setting of \fBWarpVisible\fP.
.IP "\fBf.winrefresh\fP" 8
This function is similar to the \fBf.refresh\fP function except that only the
selected window is refreshed.
.IP "\fBf.zoom\fP" 8
This function is similar to the \fBf.fullzoom\fP function, except that
the only the height of the selected window is changed.
.IP "\fBf.zoomzoom\fP" 8
This function makes a zoom outline from a random place to another random
place (see the \fBZoom\fP and \fBZoomZoom\fP variables). It's silly, but
can be used as a visual bell in place of \fBf.beep\fP.  See also the
\&\fBLessRandomZoomZoom\fP variable.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH MENUS
.PP
Functions may be grouped and interactively selected using pop-up
(when bound to a pointer button) or pull-down (when associated
with a titlebar button) menus.  Each menu specification contains the name of
the menu as it will be referred to by \fBf.menu\fP, optional default
foreground and background colors, the list of item names and the functions
they should invoke, and optional foreground and background colors for
individual items:
.RS 4
.nf
\&\fBMenu\fP    "\fImenuname\fP"    [ ("\fIdeffore\fP":"\fIdefback\fP") ]
{
    \fIstring1\fP    [ ("\fIfore1\fP":"\fIback1\fP")]    \fIfunction1\fP
    \fIstring2\fP    [ ("\fIfore2\fP":"\fIback2\fP")]    \fIfunction2\fP
      ...
    \fIstringN\fP    [ ("\fIforeN\fP":"\fIbackN\fP")]    \fIfunctionN\fP
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
The \fImenuname\fP is case-sensitive.
The optional \fIdeffore\fP and \fIdefback\fP arguments specify the foreground
and background colors used on a color display
to highlight menu entries.
The \fIstring\fP portion
of each menu entry will be the text which will appear in the menu.
The optional \fIfore\fP and \fIback\fP arguments specify the foreground
and background colors of the menu entry when the pointer is not in
the entry.  These colors will only be used on a color display.  The
default is to use the colors specified by the
\&\fBMenuForeground\fP and \fBMenuBackground\fP variables.
The \fIfunction\fP portion of the menu entry is one of the functions,
including any user-defined functions, or additional menus.
.PP
There is a special menu named \fBVTWM Windows\fP which contains the names of
all of the client and \fBvtwm\fP-supplied windows.  Selecting an entry will
cause the \fBWindowFunction\fP to be executed on that window.
If \fBWindowFunction\fP hasn't been set, the window will be deiconified and
raised.  This menu uses the same colors as the little windows in the panner.
This feature still honors the traditional \fBTwmWindows\fP menu name of yore.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH ICONS
\&\fBvtwm\fP supports several different ways of manipulating iconified windows.
The common image-and-text style may be laid out by hand or automatically
arranged as described by the \fBIconRegion\fP variable.  In addition, a
terse grid of icon names, called an icon manager, provides a more efficient
use of screen space as well as the ability to navigate among windows from
the keyboard.
.PP
An icon manager is a window that contains names of selected or all
windows currently on the display.  In addition to the window name,
a small button using the default iconify symbol will be displayed to the
left of the name when the window is iconified.  By default, clicking on an
entry in the icon manager performs \fBf.iconify\fP.
To change the actions taken in the icon manager, use
the \fBiconmgr\fP context when specifying button and keyboard bindings.
.PP
Moving the pointer into the icon manager also directs keyboard focus to
the indicated window when \fBNoIconManagerFocus\fP is not set (setting the
focus explicitly or else sending synthetic events if \fBNoTitleFocus\fP is
set).
Using the \fBf.upiconmgr\fP, \fBf.downiconmgr\fP
\&\fBf.lefticonmgr\fP, and
\&\fBf.righticonmgr\fP functions,
the input focus can be changed between windows directly from the keyboard.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH IMAGE AND AUDIO FORMATS
\&\fBvtwm\fP supports many images on its own (referred to as "internal" or
"built-in" in this document), divided into two types, \fIbitmaps\fP and
\&\fIpixmaps\fP. They are differentiated from file images by either a colon
(':') or the string ":xpm:" as the first character(s) of the name,
respectively:
.RS 4
.nf
\&\fB:darrow\fP             scaled in any, n/a for highlight
\&\fB:delete\fP / \fB:xlogo\fP    centered in any drawable
\&\fB:dot\fP / \fB:iconify\fP     centered in any drawable
\&\fB:menu\fP               scaled in any drawable
\&\fB:rarrow\fP             scaled in any, n/a for highlight
\&\fB:resize\fP             scaled in any drawable
.fi
.RE
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
\&\fB:xpm:bar\fP            scaled in any drawable
\&\fB:xpm:box\fP            scaled in any drawable
\&\fB:xpm:darrow\fP         scaled in any, n/a for highlight
\&\fB:xpm:dot\fP            centered in any drawable
\&\fB:xpm:lines\fP          scaled in any drawable
\&\fB:xpm:menu\fP           scaled in any drawable
\&\fB:xpm:raisedbox\fP      scaled, for highlight only
\&\fB:xpm:raisedlines\fP    scaled, for highlight only
\&\fB:xpm:rarrow\fP         scaled in any, n/a for highlight
\&\fB:xpm:resize\fP         scaled in any drawable
\&\fB:xpm:sunkenbox\fP      scaled, for highlight only
\&\fB:xpm:sunkenlines\fP    scaled, for highlight only
\&\fB:xpm:zoom\fP           scaled in any drawable
.fi
.RE
.PP
\&\fBvtwm\fP also supports a single image file format by default, the X Window
System bitmap (files typically carrying an extension of \fI".xbm"\fP), for
two-color images. However, when built with the XPM library, \fBvtwm\fP will
also support the X Window System pixmap (files typically carrying an extension
of \fI".xpm"\fP), for full-color images.
.PP
All image types and sources can be freely mixed within the variables that use
them, given the behavior listed above, and with the following additional
exceptions: The \fBIcons\fP and \fBUnknownIcon\fP variables don't recognize
the built-in images, the \fBRealScreenPixmap\fP, \fBTitleHighlight\fP, and
\&\fBVirtualBackgroundPixmap\fP entries of the \fBPixmaps\fP variable don't
recognize the built-in images, only titlebar buttons can accomodate external
images that would be larger than the default space allocated for them (in any
other case, the image will be cropped to fit), and only the \fBRealScreenPixmap\fP,
\&\fBTitleHighlight\fP, and \fBVirtualBackgroundPixmap\fP entries of the
\&\fBPixmaps\fP variable will tile small images into the space allocated for
them.
.PP
The icon manager drawable is hard-coded to 11x11 pixels, the menu drawable
is \fBMenuFont\fP pixels square, and titlebar buttons are
.RS 4
.nf
(\fBTitleFont\fP - (2 * \fBButtonIndent\fP))
.fi
.RE
pixels square. The titlebar highlight area is
.RS 4
.nf
(\fItitlebar height\fP - (2 * \fBFramePadding\fP) - 2)
.fi
.RE
pixels high, where \fItitlebar height\fP is determined by \fBTitleFont\fP
or the titlebar button height, whichever is greater, and \fBFramePadding\fP.
.PP
The root window can be decorated with whatever image files that are
supported by X Window System utilities and applications (\fBxloadimage\fP(1),
\&\fBxsetroot\fP(1), \fBxv\fP(1), etc.).
.PP
If \fBvtwm\fP is built with sound support, several audio file formats
are supported, not by \fBvtwm\fP per se, but by the \fBrplayd\fP(8) daemon.
Currently, the AU, AIFF, WAV, and VOC formats are natively supported, but
see also \fBrplay.helpers\fP(5).
.\"=====================================================================
.SH WILDCARDS
\&\fBvtwm\fP supports "wildcarding" when matching windows against a
variable's \fIwin-list\fP. By default, the question mark ('?') represents
any single character, the asterisk ('*') represents any zero or more
characters, and brackets ('[' and ']') represent any characters listed
within them. The backslash ('\\') "escapes" any one character, allowing
these reserved characters to be used literally.
.PP
\&\fBvtwm\fP can support a richer method of character substitution, called
\&\fIregular expressions\fP, or \fI"RE"\fPs. If \fBvtwm\fP is built with REs,
many more "wildcard" rules are added. A description of REs is beyond the
scope of this document; see the \fBre_format\fP(7) or \fBegrep\fP(1) man
pages.
.PP
\&\fBvtwm\fP distinguishes REs from strings by enclosing them in forward
slashes ('/'). The two may be freely mixed; changing the example in the
.B VARIABLES
section to:
.RS 4
.nf
\&\fBAutoRaise\fP
{
    "emacs"
    "VTWM*"
    /x.*clock/    # was "x*clock"
    "Xmh"
    "XTerm"
}
.fi
.RE
accomplishes the same thing. This is but a simple example of RE usage,
and as such doesn't demonstrate or leverage their capabilities.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH SIGNALS
It is possible to issue a \fBf.restart\fP via a UNIX signal, to ease
debugging of \fBvtwm\fP resource files.  To do this, send a SIGUSR1 to the
\&\fBvtwm\fP process ID (written to \fI$HOME/vtwm.pid\fP).
See \fBkill\fP(1) or \fBslay\fP(1).
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NOTES
Vtwm 5.4.8 and later versions support antialiased font rendering
based on the X server Xrender extension, Xft and FreeType2 technologies.
From user's view this should not affect core font appearance
(given the \fIttf\fP-equivalents of X11 core fonts are installed)
but the \fB.vtwmrc\fP font naming rules are extended to include
the Xft font specification syntax, for example
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
\&"Bitstream Vera Sans:medium:roman:size=10:antialias=true"
.fi
.RE
.PP
with \fBweight\fP being one of \fIlight\fP, \fImedium\fP,
\fIdemibold\fP, \fIbold\fP, \fIblack\fP;
\fBslant\fP one of \fIroman\fP, \fIitalic\fP, \fIoblique\fP;
and \fBsize\fP being \fIsize\fP, \fIpixelsize\fP.
Generic Xft fonts, e.g. at size 10 points, can be given by
\fI"monospace-10"\fP, \fI"sans-10"\fP, \fI"serif-10"\fP.
For further reading, see
\fI"The Xft font library: architecture and users guide"\fP by Keith Packard.
(Xft truetype font rendering can be enabled with the \fIEnableXftFontRenderer\fP
per-screen \fB.vtwmrc\fP configuration variable.)
.\"=====================================================================
.SH BUGS
There are precious few safeguards against binding functions to objects
inappropriately, especially where the virtual desktop is concerned.
.PP
Double clicking very fast to get the constrained move function will sometimes
cause the window to move, even though the pointer is not moved.
.PP
It is possible to "lose" windows in the virtual desktop by placing them
in a large desktop area, then shrinking the desktop so as to remove them
from view. They are still there, of course, but are unreachable until the
desktop is grown sufficiently large again.
.PP
See the \fIBUGS\fP file in the distribution for others.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH FILES
.PP
Searched for in the order shown:
.RS 4
.nf
\&\fI$HOME/.vtwmrc.<screen number>\fP
\&\fI$HOME/.vtwmrc\fP
\&\fI$VTWMDIR/twm/system.vtwmrc\fP
\&\fI$HOME/.twmrc.<screen number>\fP
\&\fI$HOME/.twmrc\fP
\&\fI$VTWMDIR/twm/system.twmrc\fP
.fi
.RE
.PP
.nf
\&\fI$HOME/vtwm.pid\fP
.fi
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
.IP "\fBDISPLAY\fP" 8
This variable is used to determine which X server to use.  It is also set
during \fBf.exec\fP so that programs come up on the proper screen.
.IP "\fBHOME\fP" 8
This variable is used as the prefix for files that begin with a tilde and
for locating the \fBvtwm\fP startup file.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\&\fBbitmap\fP(5),
\&\fBctwm\fP(1),
\&\fBm4\fP(1),
\&\fBmwm\fP(1),
\&\fBpixmap\fP(5),
\&\fBre_format\fP(7) or \fBegrep\fP(1),
\&\fBrplayd\fP(8) and \fBrplay.helpers\fP(5),
\&\fBtvtwm\fP(1),
\&\fBtwm\fP(1),
\&\fBvuewm\fP(1),
\&\fBX\fP(1),
\&\fBxdm\fP(1),
\&\fBxinit\fP(1),
\&\fBxmodmap\fP(1),
\&\fBxrdb\fP(1),
\&\fBXserver\fP(1),
\&\fBXft\fP(3)
.\"=====================================================================
.SH COPYRIGHT
Portions copyright 1988 Evans & Sutherland Computer Corporation; portions
copyright 1989 Hewlett-Packard Company and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology; portions copyright 2001 D. J. Hawkey Jr..
.PP
See \fBX\fP(1) for a full statement of rights and permissions.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH AUTHORS AND CONTRIBUTORS
Tom LaStrange, Solbourne Computer; Jim Fulton, MIT X Consortium;
Steve Pitschke, Stardent Computer; Keith Packard, MIT X Consortium;
Dave Payne, Apple Computer; Nick Williams <njw@athena.mit.edu>;
Dave Edmondson, Santa Cruz Operation, <davided@sco.com>;
Dana Chee, Bellcore (R5 conversion), <dana@thumper.bellcore.com>;
Warren Jessop, University of Washington, <whj@cs.washington.edu>;
Gilligan <thoth@reef.cis.ufl.edu>;
Tim Ramsey <tar@math.ksu.edu>;
Ralph Betza <gnohmon@ssiny.com>;
Michael Kutzner <futzi@uni-paderborn.de>;
Stig Ostholm <ostholm@ce.chalmers.se>;
M. Eyckmans <mce@ping.be>;
Tony Brannigan <tbrann@ox.ac.uk>;
Alec Wolman <wolman@crl.dec.com>;
<gdmr@dcs.edinburgh.ac.uk>;
Marcel Mol <marcel@duteca.et.tudelft.nl>;
Darren S. Embry <dsembr01@starbase.spd.louisville.edu>;
Chris P. Ross <cross@eng.umd.edu>;
Paul Falstad <pf@z-code.z-code.com>;
D. J. Hawkey Jr., (version 5.4), <hawkeyd@visi.com>,
with
Erik Agsjo <erik.agsjo@aktiedirekt.com>,
Ugen Antsilevitch <ugen@xonix.com>,
Nelson H. F. Beebe <beebe@math.utah.edu>,
Michael Dales <michael@dcs.gla.ac.uk>,
Jennifer Elaan <jen@elaan.com>,
Michel Eyckmans <mce@ping.be>,
Callum Gibson <callum.gibson@db.com>,
Jason Gloudon <jdg@world.std.com>,
Nicholas Jacobs <nicholas_jacobs@hotmail.com>,
Caveh Frank Jalali <caveh@eng.sun.com>
Takeharu Kato <magician@maekawa.is.uec.ac.jp>,
Goran Larsson <hoh@lorelei.approve.se>,
Rolf Neugebauer <neugebar@dcs.gla.ac.uk>,
Jonathan Paisley <jp@dcs.gla.ac.uk>,
Steve Ratcliffe <sterat@dial.pipex.com>,
Seth Robertson <seth@baka.org>,
Mehul N. Sanghvi <mehul@kirsun.ne.mediaone.net>,
Tim Wiess <tim@zetaflops.net>,
acknowledging
Claude Lecommandeur, (ctwm), <lecom@sic.epfl.ch>
.\"==============================[The End]==============================
